Fact Sheet ST-3
November 1993
Abies firma
Figure 1. Middle-aged Japanese Fir.
Japanese Fir1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Fir has a similar form to White Fir, but
has stiffer, medium to dark green needles and may
grow taller (Fig. 1). It probably grows 20 feet in 30-
years. The trunk grows straight up the center of the
tree and the crown maintains a soft, tight, pyramidal
shape without pruning. Branches are held upright on
young trees but give way to a more horizontal form as
the tree grows older. The tree looks best with lower
branches left on the tree so they sweep the ground.
Growth is very slow in the seedling stage and after
transplanting, but once established the tree will grow
about 12 inches per year.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Abies firma
Pronunciation: AY-beez FEER-muh
Common name(s): Japanese Fir
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; specimen; Christmas tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-3, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Abies firma -- Japanese Fir Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Abies firma -- Japanese Fir Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Fir.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It is used as a Christmas tree in the western
United States, and should be tried in the east as a
landscape plant and Christmas tree. Although rare in
the nursery trade, Japanese Fir is a beautiful plant
making an outstanding specimen which should be
grown and planted more often. It can be seen in a
number of arboreta in the southern part of the country.
Use it to create a slow-growing screen planted on 10
foot centers, or as a specimen.
Grown best in acid soil in the full sun, Japanese
Fir is surprisingly tolerant of heat and drought, even in
clay soil but allow for good drainage. It has not
grown well in alkaline soil. It should be a lowmaintenance tree requiring little or no fertilizer or
irrigation. It is probably one of the best (if not the
best) firs to grow in the southeast.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
There are no reports of serious pest problems,
although the tree has not been grown much or
extensively tested in the east.