Fact Sheet ST-40
November 1993
Acer pseudoplatanus
Figure 1. Young Sycamore Maple.
Sycamore Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large deciduous tree is normally seen at 40 to
60 feet in height although Sycamore Maple is capable
of reaching over 100 feet in height (Fig. 1). The
spreading branches form an oval or rounded canopy
and the dark green, three to seven-inch-diameter, lobed
leaves do not ordinarily become showy in the fall,
changing only to a muted yellow before dropping, but
this will vary. The gray to reddish-brown, scaly bark
flakes off in small scales to reveal the showy, orange,
inner bark. The green, springtime flowers appear in
three to six-inch-long hanging panicles among the
leaves in late spring and are followed by one to twoinch-long, winged seeds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer pseudoplatanus
Pronunciation: AY-ser soo-doe-PLAT-uh-nus
Common name(s): Sycamore Maple, Planetree
Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); shade tree;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit)
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 70 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-40, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer pseudoplatanus -- Sycamore Maple Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Acer pseudoplatanus -- Sycamore Maple Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Sycamore Maple.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This is a large tree which requires space to spread.
Not for the small landscape, its large, falling leaves
and early defoliation in the fall can create a challenge
for even the most enthusiastic gardener. Many bags of
leaves will be raked from beneath this handsome tree.
This tree may be best saved for the park or other large
open-space planting site since its coarse texture blends
poorly with residential and many commercial
landscapes.
Sycamore Maple grows in full sun or partial shade
on almost any well-drained soil, acid or alkaline.
Sycamore Maple is quite adaptable to various soils and
is also highly salt-tolerant. Little pruning is needed to
develop a good trunk and branch structure.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Sycamore Maple is susceptible to trunk and branch
cankers.