Fact Sheet ST-28
November 1993
Acer platanoides
Figure 1. Middle-aged Norway Maple.
Norway Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Norway maple in cultivation has a height of 40 to
50 feet but can grow much taller when shaded on the
sides (Fig. 1). The rounded crown fills with greenishyellow flowers in the spring. Norway maple’s dense
shade and shallow root system competes with lawn
grasses, and the shallow roots can make mowing under
the tree difficult. The shallow roots can heave
sidewalks so be certain to locate the tree 4 to 6 feet
away. The tree is easily transplanted, grows quickly,
is adapted to a wide variety of soils (including
alkaline) and has brilliant yellow fall color unmatched
by most trees. It can also tolerate coastal conditions.
Well adapted to street tree plantings, it is often
overused.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer platanoides
Pronunciation: AY-ser plat-uh-NOY-deez
Common name(s): Norway Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; screen;
shade tree; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-28, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer platanoides -- Norway Maple Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; dentate; incised
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Acer platanoides -- Norway Maple Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Norway Maple.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trunks can crack on the southern side during the
winter initiating some trunk decay, but the tree usually
remains intact. Branches sometimes fail from too
much weight toward the end of the branch. Although
this is rare, it can be prevented by removing selected
secondary branches from all along the main branches
to distribute the weight evenly along the main
branches. A variety of birds are known to use seeds
as a food source. Seeds germinate readily in the
landscape and could become a nuisance.
A large number of cultivars are available and are
better suited for urban planting than the species.
Those having colored summer foliage are: ‘Crimson
King’ - oval, 45 feet tall, foliage purple during the
summer; ‘Drummondii’ - leaves edged in white;
‘Schwedleri’ - oval, 45 feet tall, foliage reddish in the
spring then becoming green. Other cultivars are:
‘Almira’ - round headed, mature height of about 20
feet; ‘Cleveland’ - upright growth habit, 50 feet tall;
‘Columnare’ - columnar or upright growth habit, 35
feet tall; ‘Deborah’ - new leaves appear as a deep red;
‘Emerald Queen’ - crown oval, growth rate faster, 60
feet tall; ‘Erectum’ - upright growth habit; ‘Globosum’
- rounded head, 20 feet tall; ‘Greenlace’ - cutleaf
cultivar with rapid growth rate; ‘Jade Glen’ and
‘Parkway’ are supposed to be resistant to verticillium
wilt; ‘Olmstead’ - upright growth habit, 45 feet tall;
‘Summershade’ - crown oval, growth rate faster than
species. ‘Superform’ - round, 45 feet tall, may show
more resistance to frost cracks. There are other
cultivars including ‘Royal Red’ and others.
Pests
Leaf stalk borer and petiole-borer cause the same
type of injury. Both insects bore into the leaf stalk
just below the leaf blade. The leaf stalk shrivels, turns
black, and the leaf blade falls off. The leaf drop may
appear heavy but serious injury to a healthy tree is
rare.
Gall mites stimulate the formation of growths or
galls on the leaves. The galls are small but can be so
numerous that individual leaves curl up. The most
common gall is bladder gall mite found on silver
maple. The galls are round and at first green but later
turn red, then black, then dry up. Galls of other
shapes are seen less frequently on other types of
maples. Galls are not serious, so chemical controls are
not needed.
Aphids infest maples, usually norway maple, and
may be numerous at times. High populations can
cause leaf drop. Another sign of heavy aphid
infestation is honey dew on lower leaves and objects
beneath the tree. Aphids are controlled by spraying or
they may be left alone. If not sprayed, predatory
insects will bring the aphid population under control.
Scales are an occasional problem on maples.
Perhaps the most common is cottony maple scale. The
insect forms a cottony mass on the lower sides of
branches. Scales are usually controlled with
horticultural oil sprays. Scales may also be controlled
with well-timed sprays to kill the crawlers.
If borers become a problem it is an indication the
tree is not growing well. Controlling borers involves
keeping trees healthy. Chemical controls of existing
infestations are more difficult. Proper control involves
Acer platanoides -- Norway Maple Page 4
identification of the borer infesting the tree then
applying insecticides at the proper time.
Diseases
Verticillium wilt symptoms are wilting and death
of branches. Infected sapwood will be stained a dark
or olive green but staining can’t always be found. If
staining can not be found do not assume the problem
is not verticillium wilt. Severely infected trees
probably can’t be saved. Lightly infected trees
showing only a few wilted branches may be pulled
through. Fertilize and prune lightly infected trees.
This treatment will not cure the problem but may
allow the tree to outgrow the infection. Girdling roots
will cause symptoms which mimic verticillium wilt.
Girdling roots grow around the base of the trunk
rather than growing away from it. As both root and
trunk increase in size, the root chokes the trunk.
Girdling roots are detected by examining the base of
the trunk. The lack of trunk flare at ground level is a
symptom. The portion of the trunk above a girdling
root does not grow as rapidly as the rest so may be
slightly depressed. The offending root may be on the
surface or may be just below the sod. The tree crown
shows premature fall coloration and death of parts of
the tree in more serious cases. If large portions of the
tree have died it may not be worth saving. Girdling
roots are functional roots so when removed a portion
of the tree may die. When the girdling root is large
the treatment is as harmful as the problem. After root
removal, follow-up treatment includes watering during
dry weather. The best treatment for girdling roots is
prevention by removing or cutting circling roots at
planting or as soon as they are detected on young
trees.
Scorch occurs during periods of high temperatures
accompanied by wind. Trees with diseased or
inadequate root systems will also show scorching.
When trees do not get enough water they scorch.
Scorch symptoms are light brown or tan dead areas
between leaf veins. The symptoms are on all parts of
the tree or only on the side exposed to sun and wind.
Scorching due to dry soil may be overcome by
watering. If scorching is due to an inadequate or
diseased root system, watering may have no effect.
Nutrient deficiency symptoms are yellow or
yellowish-green leaves with darker green veins. The
most commonly deficient nutrient on maple is
manganese. Implanting capsules containing a
manganese source in the trunk will alleviate the
symptoms. Test soil samples to determine if the soil
pH is too high for best manganese availability. Plants
exposed to weed killers may also show similar
symptoms.
Tar spot and a variety of leaf spots cause some
concern among homeowners but are rarely serious
enough for control.