Fact Sheet ST-57
November 1993
Acer triflorum
Figure 1. Young Three-Flowered Maple.
Three-Flowered Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Three-Flowered Maple slowly grows to a height of
20 to 25 feet with an equal width, the dense, rounded
canopy casting dense shade below (Fig. 1). The 1.5 to
3.5-inch-long, compound leaves are slightly hairy and
turn attractive shades of orange and red in the fall
before dropping. True to its name, Three-Flowered
Maple produces three, greenish-yellow flowers
clustered together in springtime and these are followed
by 1 to 1.5-inch-long winged seeds which persist on
the tree. The red/brown bark is quite attractive and
peels off in long, thin strips.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer triflorum
Pronunciation: AY-ser try-FLOR-um
Common name(s): Three-Flowered Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); near a deck or patio; screen; trainable as a
standard; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-57, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer triflorum -- Three-Flowered Maple Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound; trifoliate
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; tree wants
to grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Acer triflorum -- Three-Flowered Maple Page 3
Current year twig color: brown
Figure 3. Foliage of Three-Flowered Maple.
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This handsome tree is well suited for use as a
specimen planted in the lawn or in a low ground
cover. The showy bark and fine texture combine to
generate a striking display during the growing season.
It provides interest in the winter when branches are
bare to show the darkened bark which contrasts nicely
against snow.
Three-Flowered Maple grows best in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained soil. Due to its shallow
root system, Three-Flowered Maple will not tolerate
soil compaction. It does not tolerate soil which
remains wet for periods of time.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.