Fact Sheet ST-14
November 1993
Acer ginnala
Figure 1. Mature Amur Maple.
Amur Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Amur maple is an excellent, low-growing tree for
small yards and other small-scale landscapes (Fig. 1).
It can be grown as a multi-stemmed clump or can be
trained into a small tree with a single trunk up to four
to six feet tall. The tree grows about 20 to 30 feet tall
and has an upright, rounded, finely branched growth
habit which creates dense shade under the crown. Due
to excessive branchiness, some pruning is required
early in the life of the tree to create dominant major
branches. Amur maple can grow rapidly when it is
young if it receives water and fertilizer, but it is wellsuited for planting close to power lines since it slows
down and remains small at maturity.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer ginnala
Pronunciation: AY-ser jin-NAY-luh
Common name(s): Amur Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
hedge; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); near a deck or patio;
screen; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; palmate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-14, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer ginnala -- Amur Maple Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: pink
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Acer ginnala -- Amur Maple Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Amur Maple.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The main ornamental value of Amur Maple is the
brilliant red fall foliage color and fruit which sports
bright pink wings. It is a durable tree, tolerating poor
soil, but will grow less vigorously in the southern end
of its range. It will leaf scorch in dry summers in full
sun but is very drought-tolerant and will not die-back.
It is most drought-tolerant in partial shade. The plant
is sometimes used in hedges or screens, and can be
used for planting along streets beneath power lines. It
makes a nice specimen or patio tree.
There are several cultivars including
‘Compactum’, which is smaller, ‘Red Fruit’ and
‘Durland Dwarf’. ‘Bailey Compact’ has a compact,
dark green, rounded crown form. It requires no
pruning to develop a ‘perfect’ round crown and is
pest-free.
Pests
Amur maple is usually pest-free.
Aphids infest maples, usually Norway Maple, and
may be numerous at times. High populations can
cause leaf drop. Another sign of heavy aphid
infestation is honey dew on lower leaves and objects
beneath the tree. Aphids are controlled by spraying or
they may be left alone. If not sprayed, predatory
insects will bring the aphid population under control.
Scales are an occasional problem on maples.
Perhaps the most common is cottony maple scale. The
insect forms a cottony mass on the lower sides of
branches. Scales are usually controlled with
horticultural oil sprays applied in spring before growth
begins. Scales may also be controlled with well-timed
sprays to kill the crawlers.
If borers become a problem it is an indication the
tree is not growing well. Controlling borers involves
keeping trees healthy. Chemical controls of existing
infestations are more difficult. Proper control involves
identification of the borer infesting the tree then
applying insecticides at the proper time.
Diseases
Verticillium wilt symptoms are wilting and death
of branches. Infected sapwood will be stained a dark
or olive green but staining can’t always be found. If
staining can not be found do not assume the problem
is not verticillium wilt. Severely infected trees
probably can’t be saved. Lightly infected trees
showing only a few wilted branches may be pulled
through. Fertilize and prune lightly infected trees.
This treatment will not cure the problem but may
allow the tree to outgrow the infection. Girdling roots
will cause symptoms which mimic verticillium wilt.
Scorch occurs during periods of high temperatures
accompanied by wind. Trees with diseased or
inadequate root systems will also show scorching.
When trees do not get enough water they scorch.
Scorch symptoms are light brown or tan dead areas
between leaf veins. The symptoms are on all parts of
the tree or only on the side exposed to sun and wind.
Scorching due to dry soil may be overcome by
watering. If scorching is due to an inadequate or
diseased root system, watering may have no effect.
Acer ginnala -- Amur Maple Page 4
Tar spot and a variety of leaf spots cause some
concern among homeowners but are rarely serious
enough for control.