Fact Sheet ST-48
November 1993
Acer saccharinum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Silver Maple.
Silver Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Silver Maple has a vase shape and is a rapidlygrowing, fairly weak-wooded tree which reaches a
height of 80 to 100 feet with a 5 to 6 foot diameter
trunk on a moist site (Fig. 1). The tree is useful in
wet areas, transplants easily and can grow where few
others can. It should be saved for planting in wet
areas or where nothing else will thrive. Roots often
grow on the surface of the soil making mowing grass
difficult under the canopy. They also are aggressive,
growing into septic tank drain fields and into broken
water and sewer pipes. It is also hard to plant shrubs
and other plants beneath the branches due to the dense
root system.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer saccharinum
Pronunciation: AY-ser sack-uh-RYE-num
Common name(s): Silver Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; shade tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-48, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer saccharinum -- Silver Maple Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: incised; parted
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.47
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Acer saccharinum -- Silver Maple Page 3
Drought tolerance: high
Figure 3. Foliage of Silver Maple.
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Silver Maple will grow in areas which have
standing water for several weeks at a time. It grows
best on acid soil which remains moist, but adapts to
very dry, alkaline soil. Leaves may scorch in areas
with restricted soil space during dry spells in the
summer but will tolerate drought if roots can grow
unrestricted into a large soil volume.
Branches tend to droop, almost weep, forming a
graceful canopy outline as it grows older. The bright
yellow fall color can attract attention in early fall but
you will pay the price with the abundant number of
leaves to rake. To develop a stronger, more durable
tree, prune so that major limbs remain smaller than
half the diameter of the trunk.
Silver Maple can be a prolific seed producer
giving rise to many volunteer trees. It often sends up
sprouts from the trunk and branches producing an
unkempt appearance. Branches often form poor
attachments with trunk resulting in branch failure in
old, mature specimens. Frequent pruning is required
to develop a strong branch structure. Ice and snow
loads can cause branch failure in younger trees. Like
many other large trees, it will lift sidewalks if
improperly located too close to sidewalks. There are
numerous insect and disease problems. There are too
many other superior trees to warrant wide use of this
species but it does have its place in tough sites away
from buildings and people. It grows extremely fast so
creates almost instant shade, making this a popular tree
among homeowners throughout its hardiness range.
Trees are susceptible to many pest problems but
none so serious to warrant control.
There are a few cultivars but these also have weak
wood: ‘Pyramidale’ - narrow crown; ‘Silver Queen’ -
bright green leaves with lower leaf surfaces silvery;
‘Skinneri’- somewhat weeping, pyramidal form,
dissected leaves with a better branching habit; ‘Weiri’
- cutleaved form with pendulous branches. There is a
recently introduced (1987) hybrid cross between Red
and Silver Maple called Hybrid Maple (Acer x
fremanii). Cultivars of this hybrid include ‘Armstrong
Two’ with a narrow columnar crown to 35 feet tall,
‘Autumn Blaze’ with an oval crown to 50 feet tall,
‘Celebration’ with a narrow upright crown and a
strong central leader to 50 or 60 feet tall, ‘Celzam’
with a narrow oval crown to 50 feet tall, and ‘Scarlet
Sentenial’ with great fall color, and oval crown to 40
feet tall. The culture of these trees is probably similar
to Red Maple.
Trees are propagated from seeds and from
cuttings. Cultivars are best produced from cuttings.
Pests
Leaf stalk borer and petiole-borer cause the same
type of injury. Both insects bore into the leaf stalk
just below the leaf blade. The leaf stalk shrivels, turns
black, and the leaf blade falls off. The leaf drop may
appear heavy but serious injury to a healthy tree is
rare.
Acer saccharinum -- Silver Maple Page 4
Gall mites stimulate the formation of growths or
galls on the leaves. The galls are small but can be so
numerous that individual leaves curl up. The most
common gall is bladder gall mite found on silver
maple. The galls are round and at first green but later
turn red, then black, then dry up. Galls of other
shapes are seen less frequently on other types of
maples. Galls are not serious, so chemical controls are
not needed.
Crimson erineum mite is usually found on silver
maple and causes the formation of red fuzzy patches
on the lower leaf surfaces. The problem is not serious
so control measures are not suggested.
Aphids infest maples, usually Norway Maple, and
may be numerous at times. High populations can
cause leaf drop. Another sign of heavy aphid
infestation is honey dew on lower leaves and objects
beneath the tree. Aphids are controlled by spraying or
they may be left alone. If not sprayed, predatory
insects will bring the aphid population under control.
Scales are an occasional problem on maples.
Perhaps the most common is cottony maple scale. The
insect forms a cottony mass on the lower sides of
branches. Scales are usually controlled with
horticultural oil sprays. Scales may also be controlled
with well-timed sprays to kill the crawlers.
If borers become a problem it is an indication the
tree is not growing well. Controlling borers involves
keeping trees healthy. Chemical controls of existing
infestations are more difficult. Proper control involves
identification of the borer infesting the tree then
applying insecticides at the proper time.
Diseases
Anthracnose is more of a problem in rainy
seasons. The disease resembles, and may be confused
with, a physiological problem called scorch. The
disease causes light brown or tan areas on the leaves.
Anthracnose may be controlled by fungicides sprayed
on as leaves open in the spring. Two additional sprays
at two-week intervals will be needed. The disease is
most common on sugar and silver maples and
boxelder. Other maples may not be affected as
severely. Sprays may need to be applied by a
commercial applicator having proper spray equipment.
Verticillium wilt symptoms are wilting and death
of branches. Infected sapwood will be stained a dark
or olive green but staining can’t always be found. If
staining can not be found do not assume the problem
is not verticillium wilt. Severely infected trees
probably can’t be saved. Lightly infected trees
showing only a few wilted branches may be pulled
through. Fertilize and prune lightly infected trees.
This treatment will not cure the problem but may
allow the tree to outgrow the infection. Girdling roots
will cause symptoms which mimic verticillium wilt.
Tar spot and a variety of leaf spots cause some
concern among homeowners but are rarely serious
enough for control.