Fact Sheet ST-19
November 1993
Acer leucoderme
Figure 1. Middle-aged Chalk Maple.
Chalk Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This 25 to 30-foot-tall native North American tree
is reportedly quite similar to Acer barbatum or Florida
Maple and is often seen with multiple trunks (Fig. 1).
The chalky white or light gray bark is quite attractive,
with the bark on older trees becoming ridged and
blackened near the ground. The two to three-inchdiameter, lobed leaves, with fuzzy undersides, give a
spectacular display in the fall months, ranging from
shimmering yellow to vivid orange and deep red.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer leucoderme
Pronunciation: AY-ser loo-koe-DER-mee
Common name(s): Chalk Maple, Whitebark Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; shade tree; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-19, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer leucoderme -- Chalk Maple Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; entire
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk;
tree wants to grow with several trunks but can be
trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Acer leucoderme -- Chalk Maple Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The striking white bark makes this Maple well
suited for planting as a specimen displayed against a
dark background. A row of these Maples planted
along a dark glass building wall or other dark structure
would get people’s attention. Surprisingly underused,
this small Maple is well suited for a variety of sites,
including residences.
Chalk Maple grows well in full sun, partial shade,
or deep shade, and has a high tolerance for dry soils.
The tree is quite popular in the midwest in areas with
alkaline soil pH.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.