Fact Sheet ST-41
November 1993
Acer rubrum
Figure 1. Mature Red Maple.
Red Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Red Maple has an oval shape and is a fast grower
with strong wood, reaching a height of 75 feet (Fig.
1). Unless irrigated or on a wet site, Red Maple is
best used north of USDA hardiness zone 9. Trees are
often much shorter in the southern part of its range
unless growing next to a stream or on a wet site. This
tree is preferred over Silver Maple or Boxelder when a
fast growing Maple is needed. When planting the
species Acer rubrum, select only those which have
been grown from seed sources in your area. The
newly emerging leaves and red flowers and fruits
signal that spring has come. They appear in December
and January in Florida, later in the northern part of its
range. The seeds of red maple are quite popular with
squirrels and birds. This tree if sometimes confused
with red-leaved cultivars of Norway Maple.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer rubrum
Pronunciation: AY-ser ROO-brum
Common name(s): Red Maple, Swamp Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; shade tree;
residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 75 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; round; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-41, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer rubrum -- Red Maple Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; incised; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: gray; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.54
Acer rubrum -- Red Maple Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Red Maple.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The outstanding ornamental characteristic of Red
Maple is red, orange or yellow fall color (sometimes
on the same tree) lasting several weeks. Red maple is
often one of the first trees to color up in autumn, and
it puts on one of the most brilliant displays of any tree
but trees vary greatly in fall color and intensity.
Cultivars are more consistently colored.
The tree makes the best growth in wet places and
has no other particular soil preference except chlorosis
may develop on alkaline soil where it also grows
poorly. It is well-suited as a street tree in northern
and mid-south climates in residential and other
suburban areas but the bark is thin and easily damaged
by mowers. Irrigation is often needed to support street
tree plantings in well-drained soil in the south. Roots
can raise sidewalks as silver maples can but they have
a less aggressive root system and so they make a good
street tree. Surface roots beneath the canopy can make
mowing difficult.
Red Maple is easily transplanted and usually
develops surface roots in soil ranging from welldrained sand to clay. It is not especially droughttolerant, particularly in the southern part of the range,
but selected individual trees can be found growing on
dry sites. This trait shows the wide range of genetic
diversity in the species. Branches often grow upright
through the crown forming poor attachments to the
trunk. These should be removed in the nursery or
after planting in the landscape to help prevent branch
failure in older trees during storms. Select branches
with a wide angle from the trunk and prevent branches
from growing larger than half the diameter of the
trunk.
A number of cultivars are listed. Due to graftincompatibility problems which cause the tree to break
apart, preference should be given to cultivars produced
on their own roots. In the northern and southern end
of the range, choose cultivars with regional adaptation.
The cultivars are: ‘Armstrong’ - upright growth habit,
almost columnar, somewhat prone to splitting branches
due to tight crotches, 50 feet tall; ‘Autumn Flame’ -
45 feet tall, round, above average fall color; ‘Bowhall’
- upright growth habit, branches form embedded bark,
graft incompatibility on grafted trees; ‘Gerling’ -
densely branched, broadly pyramidal, about 35 feet tall
when mature; ‘October Glory’ - above average fall
color, excellent tree, retains leaves late, 60 feet tall;
‘Red Sunset’ - above average orange to red fall color,
does well in the south in USDA hardiness zone 8,
Acer rubrum -- Red Maple Page 4
probably the best cultivar for the deep south, oval, 50
feet tall; ‘Scanlon’ - upright growth habit;
‘Schlesinger’ - good fall color, rapid growth rate;
‘Tilford’ - globe-shaped crown. Variety drummondii
suitable in USDA hardiness zone 8.
There is a recently introduced hybrid cross
between Red and Silver Maple called Hybrid Maple
(Acer x fremanii). Cultivars of this hybrid include
‘Armstrong’ with a narrow columnar crown to 35 feet
tall, ‘Autumn Blaze’ with an oval crown to 50 feet
tall, ‘Celebration’ with a narrow upright crown and a
strong central leader to 50 or 60 feet tall, ‘Celzam’
with a narrow oval crown to 50 feet tall, and ‘Scarlet
Sentenial’ with great fall color, and oval crown to 40
feet tall. The culture of these trees is probably similar
to Red Maple.
Pests
Leaf stalk borer and petiole-borer cause the same
type of injury. Both insects bore into the leaf stalk
just below the leaf blade. The leaf stalk shrivels, turns
black, and the leaf blade falls off. The leaf drop may
appear heavy but serious injury to a healthy tree is
rare.
Gall mites stimulate the formation of growths or
galls on the leaves. The galls are small but can be so
numerous that individual leaves curl up. The most
common gall is bladder gall mite found on silver
maple. The galls are round and at first green but later
turn red, then black, then dry up. Galls of other
shapes are seen less frequently on other types of
maples. Galls are not serious, so chemical controls are
not needed.
Crimson erineum mite is usually found on silver
maple and causes the formation of red fuzzy patches
on the lower leaf surfaces. The problem is not serious
so control measures are not suggested.
Aphids infest maples, usually Norway Maple, and
may be numerous at times. High populations can
cause leaf drop. Another sign of heavy aphid
infestation is honey dew on lower leaves and objects
beneath the tree. Aphids are controlled by spraying or
they may be left alone. If not sprayed, predatory
insects will bring the aphid population under control.
Scales are an occasional problem on maples.
Perhaps the most common is cottony maple scale. The
insect forms a cottony mass on the lower sides of
branches. Scales are usually controlled with
horticultural oil sprays. Scales may also be controlled
with well-timed sprays to kill the crawlers.
If borers become a problem it is an indication the
tree is not growing well. Controlling borers involves
keeping trees healthy. Chemical controls of existing
infestations are more difficult. Proper control involves
identification of the borer infesting the tree then
applying insecticides at the proper time.
Twig borers can cause die-back of the terminal 8
to 12 inches of small-diameter branches. This is
usually not serious and does not require control
measures, but it can be a problem on young trees in
the nursery.
Diseases
Anthracnose is more of a problem in rainy
seasons. The disease resembles, and may be confused
with, a physiological problem called scorch. The
disease causes light brown or tan areas on the leaves.
Anthracnose may be controlled by fungicides sprayed
on as leaves open in the spring. Two additional sprays
at two-week intervals will be needed. The disease is
most common on sugar and silver maples and
boxelder. Other maples may not be affected as
severely. Sprays may need to be applied by a
commercial applicator having proper spray equipment.
Girdling roots grow around the base of the trunk
rather than growing away from it. As both root and
trunk increase in size, the root chokes the trunk.
Girdling roots are detected by examining the base of
the trunk. The lack of trunk flare at ground level is a
symptom. The portion of the trunk above a girdling
root does not grow as rapidly as the rest so may be
slightly depressed. The offending root may be on the
surface or may be just below the sod. The tree crown
shows premature fall coloration and death of parts of
the tree in more serious cases. If large portions of the
tree have died it may not be worth saving. Girdling
roots are functional roots so when removed a portion
of the tree may die. When the girdling root is large
the treatment is as harmful as the problem. After root
removal, follow-up treatment includes watering during
dry weather. The best treatment for girdling roots is
prevention by removing or cutting circling roots at
planting or as soon as they are detected on young
trees.
Scorch may occur during periods of high
temperatures accompanied by wind. Trees with
diseased or inadequate root systems will also show
Acer rubrum -- Red Maple Page 5
scorching. When trees do not get enough water they
scorch. Scorch symptoms are light brown or tan dead
areas between leaf veins. The symptoms are on all
parts of the tree or only on the side exposed to sun
and wind. Scorching due to dry soil may be overcome
by watering. If scorching is due to an inadequate or
diseased root system, watering may have no effect.
Nutrient deficiency symptoms are yellow or
yellowish-green leaves with darker green veins. The
most commonly deficient nutrient on maple is
manganese. Implanting capsules containing a
manganese source in the trunk will alleviate the
symptoms. Test soil samples to determine if the soil
pH is too high for best manganese availability. Plants
exposed to weed killers may also show similar
symptoms.
Tar spot and a variety of leaf spots cause some
concern among homeowners but are rarely serious
enough for control.