Fact Sheet ST-17
November 1993
Acer griseum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Paperbark Maple.
Paperbark Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Perhaps the most beautiful maple, Paperbark
Maple has trifoliate leaves and wonderfully orange to
bronze, peeling, papery bark which provides year
round interest (Fig. 1). The bark begins peeling on the
sculptured trunk and on 2 or 3-year-old branches. It
may be cinnamon brown or orange but is usually a
dark reddish-brown, looking particularly striking in the
snow. Even small branches display exfoliating bark
making this a true specimen tree, even at a young age.
Most specimens are seen with multiple trunks which
branch close to the ground, but proper training when
young can create a single trunk. Paperbark maple has
vibrant, scarlet, autumn foliage.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer griseum
Pronunciation: AY-ser GRISS-ee-um
Common name(s): Paperbark Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; upright; vase shape
Crown density: open
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-17, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer griseum -- Paperbark Maple Page 2
Growth rate: slow
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound; trifoliate
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to grow
with several trunks but can be trained to grow with a
single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Acer griseum -- Paperbark Maple Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Paperbark Maple.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The multi-stemmed habit, unusual leaves, and
wonderful bark makes this a prime candidate for
specimen planting in any commercial, institutional, or
residential landscape. If you can find it, plant it by a
patio or other prime location and light it from below
for nighttime enjoyment.
The tree is hardy, grows very slowly to 25 or 30
feet tall, but, unfortunately, is difficult and expensive
to propagate. It does not tolerate extended drought or
other environmental stresses in the south or in poor
soil (moderate drought-tolerance in sandy loam) but
will grow in sun or shade. Leaves will scorch during
dry summers unless provided with some irrigation.
Probably best in partial shade if planted in the south.
The beauty of this tree makes up for the extra effort
required to grow it. If this plant could be easily
propagated it would be widely used because the price
of the plant would drop to levels acceptable to most
people.
Pests and Diseases
Probably has similar pest and disease problems as
other maples.