Fact Sheet ST-20
November 1993
Acer negundo
Figure 1. Middle-aged Boxelder.
Boxelder1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Boxelder forms a 40 to 50-foot-tall rounded
canopy of very light green foliage (Fig. 1). The
boxelder is an undesirable tree for many urban
situations and in some cities, planting it may be
illegal. The undesirable characteristics are brittle,
weak wood, short life and susceptibility to boxelder
bug and trunk decay. But the tree will grow just about
anywhere and therefore it may have uses due to its
adaptability. The best thing about the tree is that it
will grow on adverse sites where more desirable trees
may not. If you use the tree, plant it for its quick
growth, but interplant with more desirable trees to
provide for a lasting tree canopy. Boxelder is native
along streambanks over a wide area of the United
States, grows along flood plains and naturalizes
quickly on disturbed sites. It may be best to restrict
planting to these areas. It is tolerant of drought and
was planted as a shelter-belt tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer negundo
Pronunciation: AY-ser nuh-GUHN-doe
Common name(s): Boxelder
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; reclamation plant; screen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 35 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-20, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer negundo -- Boxelder Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: lobed; serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Acer negundo -- Boxelder Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Boxelder.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree is sometimes listed in catalogs as ash
leaved maple and the numerous, attractive seeds are
very popular with squirrels. Fall color can be vivid
yellow in the north to muted orange-brown in the
southern part of its range. There is occasional good
fall color in the south. A nice plant for naturalized
areas, particularly if the soil is wet, or the pH is
alkaline. It is probably best used in these areas to help
stabilize stream beds and colonize reclaimed land. Do
not plant it as a street tree.
The cultivars of boxelder are more ornamental but
still share the tree’s undesirable characteristics:
‘Aureo-variegatum’ - leaves bordered in gold;
‘Flamingo’ - variegated leaves with pink margins,
somewhat available; ‘Variegatum’ - leaves bordered in
white; ‘Auratum’ - leaves gold; ‘Elegantissima’ -
yellow leaf variegations.
Pests
Leaf stalk borer and petiole-borer cause the same
type of injury. Both insects bore into the leaf stalk
just below the leaf blade. The leaf stalk shrivels, turns
black, and the leaf blade falls off. The leaf drop may
appear heavy but serious injury to a healthy tree is
rare.
Gall mites stimulate the formation of growths or
galls on the leaves. The galls are small but can be so
numerous that individual leaves curl up. The most
common gall is bladder gall mite found on silver
maple. The galls are round and at first green but later
turn red, then black, then dry up. Galls of other
shapes are seen less frequently on other types of
maples. Galls are not serious, so chemical controls are
not needed.
Crimson erineum mite is usually found on silver
maple and causes the formation of red fuzzy patches
on the lower leaf surfaces. The problem is not serious
so control measures are not suggested.
Aphids infest maples, usually norway maple, and
may be numerous at times. High populations can
cause leaf drop. Another sign of heavy aphid
infestation is honey dew on lower leaves and objects
beneath the tree. Aphids are controlled by spraying or
they may be left alone. If not sprayed, predatory
insects will bring the aphid population under control.
Acer negundo -- Boxelder Page 4
Boxelder bug infests boxelders, primarily the
female trees. The insect does no serious harm to the
tree but is a nuisance when it overwinters in homes.
The insects are red and black and can be vacuumed up
when seen in the house. Control measures include
removal of female boxelder trees. If boxelders are
growing in adjacent yards removing your tree may not
be effective.
Scales are an occasional problem on maples.
Perhaps the most common is cottony maple scale. The
insect forms a cottony mass on the lower sides of
branches. Scales are usually controlled with
horticultural oil sprays. Scales may also be controlled
with well-timed sprays to kill the crawlers.
If borers become a problem it is an indication the
tree is not growing well. Controlling borers involves
keeping trees healthy. Chemical controls of existing
infestations are more difficult. Proper control involves
identification of the borer infesting the tree then
applying insecticides at the proper time.
Diseases
Anthracnose is more of a problem in rainy
seasons. The disease resembles, and may be confused
with, a physiological problem called scorch. The
disease causes light brown or tan areas on the leaves.
Anthracnose may be controlled by fungicides sprayed
on as leaves open in the spring. Two additional sprays
at two-week intervals will be needed. The disease is
most common on sugar and silver maples and
boxelder. Other maples may not be affected as
severely. Sprays may need to be applied by a
commercial applicator having proper spray equipment.
Verticillium wilt symptoms are wilting and death
of branches. Infected sapwood will be stained a dark
or olive green but staining can’t always be found. If
staining can not be found do not assume the problem
is not verticillium wilt. Severely infected trees
probably can’t be saved. Lightly infected trees
showing only a few wilted branches may be pulled
through. Fertilize and prune lightly infected trees.
This treatment will not cure the problem but may
allow the tree to outgrow the infection. Girdling roots
will cause symptoms which mimic verticillium wilt.
Girdling roots grow around the base of the trunk
rather than growing away from it. As both root and
trunk increase in size, the root chokes the trunk.
Girdling roots are detected by examining the base of
the trunk. The lack of trunk flare at ground level is a
symptom. The portion of the trunk above a girdling
root does not grow as rapidly as the rest so may be
slightly depressed. The offending root may be on the
surface or may be just below the sod. The tree crown
shows premature fall coloration and death of parts of
the tree in more serious cases. If large portions of the
tree have died it may not be worth saving. Girdling
roots are functional roots so when removed a portion
of the tree may die. When the girdling root is large
the treatment is as harmful as the problem. After root
removal, follow-up treatment includes watering during
dry weather. The best treatment for girdling roots is
prevention by removing or cutting circling roots at
planting or as soon as they are detected on young
trees.
Tar spot and a variety of leaf spots cause some
concern among homeowners but are rarely serious
enough for control.