Fact Sheet ST-51
November 1993
Acer saccharum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Sugar Maple.
Sugar Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sugar Maple is the most common maple in the
east and is a hard-wooded tree with a moderate to
slow growth rate (Fig. 1). The tree will be 60 to 80
feet tall at maturity in landscape plantings. Sugar
Maple grows about 1 foot each year in most soils but
is sensitive to reflected heat, and to drought, turning
the leaves brown (scorch) along their edges. Leaf
scorch from dry soil is often evident in areas where
the root system is restricted to a small soil area, such
as a street tree planting. It is more drought-tolerant in
open areas where the roots can proliferate into a large
soil space.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer saccharum
Pronunciation: AY-ser sack-AR-rum
Common name(s): Sugar Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); screen;
shade tree; residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 80 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-51, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer saccharum -- Sugar Maple Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; undulate
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.63
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Acer saccharum -- Sugar Maple Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Sugar Maple.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The dense, highly branched crown creates dense
shade and will prevent good lawn growth. Branches
are usually well-attached to trunks resulting in a low
branch failure rate. The main ornamental feature of
the tree is the brilliant red, yellow, or orange fall color
that develops in the cooler part of its range. The
yellows are more prominent in the south. The tree
transplants fairly easily but may develop girdling roots
which can reduce growth, or in extreme cases kill the
tree.
The limbs of Sugar Maple are usually strong and
not susceptible to wind damage. The bark forms
attractive bright gray plates which stand out especially
during the winter. Roots are often shallow and reach
the surface at an early age, even in sandy soil. Plant
in an area where grass below it will not need to be
mowed so the roots will not be damaged by the
mower. A variety of birds use the tree for food,
nesting and cover and the fruits are especially popular
with squirrels. About 40 gallons of sap are required to
produce 1 gallon of maple syrup from the Sugar Maple
tree.
Growing in full sun or shade, Sugar Maple will
tolerate a wide variety of soil types (except compacted
soil) but is not salt-tolerant. Established trees look
better when given some irrigation during dry weather,
particularly in the south. In the south, many leaves
remain in the central portion of the canopy for much
of the winter, giving the tree a somewhat unkempt
appearance. Sugar Maples are not recommended for
the Dallas area, in many cases due to alkaline soils
causing chlorosis. Sensitivity to compaction, heat,
drought and road salt limit usage of Sugar Maple for
urban street plantings, but it is still recommended for
parks and other areas away from roads where soil is
loose and well-drained. Acer nigrum, a similar
species, is more tolerant of heat and drought.
Nurseries may offer one or several cultivars of
Sugar Maple: ‘Bonfire’ - brilliant orange-red fall color;
‘Endowment Columnar’ - 50 feet tall, columnar form,
red and yellow fall color; ‘Globosum’ - a slow grower
with a dense round crown and a mature height of
about 10 feet; ‘Goldspire’ - dense, compact, pyramidal
form, gold fall color; ‘Green Mountain’ (this is a
specific cross) - upright oval crown and scarlet fall
color, may be more resistant to sun scorch; ‘Majesty’ -
ovate form, resistant to frost crack and sun scald.
‘Newton Sentry’ - upright growth habit; ‘Sweet
Shadow’ - cut leaves; ‘Temple’s Upright’ - an upright
growth habit. There are other cultivars including
‘Commemoration’ and ‘Legacy’ which are reportedly
resistant to leaf tatter.
Propagation is by seeds, budding, or cuttings.
The Florida maple - Acer barbatum (Acer
saccharum var. floridum) - is considered by some
taxonomists to be a separate species. The correct
taxonomic nomenclature appears to depend on which
botanist, horticulturist, etc., you rely upon as your
"expert". It reaches 50 to 60 feet in height but is often
smaller. Displaying muted yellow or orange fall leaf
Acer saccharum -- Sugar Maple Page 4
color, Florida maple is ideal for use as a specimen,
park or street tree, or for use in woodland areas and is
much preferred over Sugar Maple in USDA hardiness
zones 8b through 9. The round to oval growth habit
makes it an ideal shade or street tree. The edges of
the leaves turn under slightly giving them a distinct
appearance. The trunk on older specimens resembles
that on the northern Sugar Maple, which is an
attractive gray with longitudinal ribs.
Pests
Leaf stalk borer and petiole-borer cause the same
type of injury. Both insects bore into the leaf stalk
just below the leaf blade. The leaf stalk shrivels, turns
black, and the leaf blade falls off. The leaf drop may
appear heavy but serious injury to a healthy tree is
rare.
Gall mites stimulate the formation of growths or
galls on the leaves. The galls are small but can be so
numerous that individual leaves curl up. The most
common gall is bladder gall mite found on Silver
Maple. The galls are round and at first green but later
turn red, then black, then dry up. Galls of other
shapes are seen less frequently on other types of
maples. Galls are not serious, so chemical controls are
not needed.
Crimson erineum mite is usually found on Silver
Maple and causes the formation of red fuzzy patches
on the lower leaf surfaces. The problem is not serious
so control measures are not suggested.
Aphids infest maples, usually Norway Maple, and
may be numerous at times. High populations can
cause leaf drop. Another sign of heavy aphid
infestation is honey dew on lower leaves and objects
beneath the tree. Aphids are controlled by spraying or
they may be left alone. If not sprayed, predatory
insects will bring the aphid population under control.
Scales are an occasional problem on maples.
Perhaps the most common is cottony maple scale. The
insect forms a cottony mass on the lower sides of
branches. Scales are usually controlled with
horticultural oil. Scales may also be controlled with
well-timed sprays to kill the crawlers.
If borers become a problem it is an indication the
tree is not growing well. Controlling borers involves
keeping trees healthy. Chemical controls of existing
infestations are more difficult. Proper control involves
identification of the borer infesting the tree then
applying insecticides at the proper time.
Diseases
Anthracnose is more of a problem in rainy
seasons. The disease resembles, and may be confused
with, a physiological problem called scorch. The
disease causes light brown or tan areas on the leaves.
Anthracnose may be controlled by fungicides sprayed
on as leaves open in the spring. Two additional sprays
at two-week intervals will be needed. The disease is
most common on sugar and Silver Maples and
boxelder. Other maples may not be affected as
severely. Sprays may need to be applied by a
commercial applicator having proper spray equipment.
Verticillium wilt symptoms are wilting and death
of branches. Infected sapwood will be stained a dark
or olive green but staining can’t always be found. If
staining can not be found do not assume the problem
is not verticillium wilt. Severely infected trees
probably can’t be saved. Lightly infected trees
showing only a few wilted branches may be pulled
through. Fertilize and prune lightly infected trees.
This treatment will not cure the problem but may
allow the tree to outgrow the infection. Girdling roots
will cause symptoms which mimic verticillium wilt.
Girdling roots grow around the base of the trunk
rather than growing away from it. As both root and
trunk increase in size, the root chokes the trunk.
Girdling roots are detected by examining the base of
the trunk. The lack of trunk flare at ground level is a
symptom. The portion of the trunk above a girdling
root does not grow as rapidly as the rest so may be
slightly depressed. The offending root may be on the
surface or may be just below the sod. The tree crown
shows premature fall coloration and death of parts of
the tree in more serious cases. If large portions of the
tree have died it may not be worth saving. Girdling
roots are functional roots so when removed a portion
of the tree may die. When the girdling root is large
the treatment is as harmful as the problem. After root
removal, follow-up treatment includes watering during
dry weather. The best treatment for girdling roots is
prevention by removing or cutting circling roots at
planting or as soon as they are detected on young
trees.
Scorch occurs during periods of high temperatures
accompanied by wind. Trees with diseased or
inadequate root systems will also show scorching.
When trees do not get enough water they scorch.
Acer saccharum -- Sugar Maple Page 5
Scorch symptoms are light brown or tan dead areas
between leaf veins. The symptoms are on all parts of
the tree or only on the side exposed to sun and wind.
Scorching due to dry soil may be overcome by
watering. If scorching is due to an inadequate or
diseased root system, watering may have no effect.
Nutrient deficiency symptoms are yellow or
yellowish-green leaves with darker green veins. The
most commonly deficient nutrient on maple is
manganese. Implanting capsules containing a
manganese source in the trunk will alleviate the
symptoms. Test soil samples to determine if the soil
pH is too high for best manganese availability. Plants
exposed to weed killers may also show similar symptoms.
Tar spot and a variety of leaf spots cause some
concern among homeowners but are rarely serious
enough for control.