Fact Sheet ST-23
November 1993
Acer palmatum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Japanese Maple.
Japanese Maple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese maple has a height and spread of about
20 feet, but there are much smaller selections available
(Fig. 1). The multiple trunks are muscular-looking,
picturesque, grey and show nicely when lit up at night.
Japanese maple is grown for its green or red colored
leaves, interesting growth habit and fine leaf texture.
Fall color ranges from bright yellow through orange
and red, and is often striking, even on trees grown in
total shade. Growth habit varies widely depending on
cultivar from globose, branching to the ground to
upright, vase-shaped. The globose selections look best
when they are allowed to branch to the ground. Be
sure to clear all turf away from beneath the branches
of these low growing types so the lawn mower will
not damage the tree. The more upright selections
make nice patio or small shade trees for residential
lots, and, with pruning to remove drooping branches,
provide adequate clearance for pedestrian traffic to
pass close to the tree. More compact cultivars make
wonderful accents for any landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acer palmatum
Pronunciation: AY-ser pal-MAY-tum
Common name(s): Japanese Maple
Family: Aceraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter; near
a deck or patio; trainable as a standard; specimen
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; serrate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-23, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acer palmatum -- Japanese Maple Page 2
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Acer palmatum -- Japanese Maple Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Maple.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This large shrub or small tree tends to leaf out
early, so it may be injured by spring frosts. Protect
them from drying winds and direct sun by providing
exposure to partial or filtered shade and well-drained,
acid soil with plenty of organic matter, particularly in
the southern part of its range. Leaves often scorch in
hot summer weather in USDA hardiness zones 7b and
8, unless they are in some shade or irrigated during
dry weather. More direct sun can be tolerated in the
northern part of the range. Be sure drainage is
maintained and never allow water to stand around the
roots. Grows fine on clay soils as long as the ground
is sloped so water does not accumulate in the soil.
Responds well to several inches of mulch placed
beneath the canopy.
Variegated types are a bit more difficult to grow
and are subject to leaf scorch. There are many
cultivars of Japanese maple with a wide variety of leaf
shapes and color, growth habits, and sizes:
‘Atropurpureum’ - reddish leaves with five lobes;
‘Bloodgood’ - new foliage bright red, darkening to
dark green; ‘Burgundy Lace’ - reddish foliage and cut
leaves; ‘Dissectum’ - finely dissected leaves in green
or red, 10 to 12 feet tall; ‘Elegans’ - leaves with
rose-colored margins when they first unfold;
‘Ornatum’ - foliage is cut and reddish.
Pests
Aphids infest maples, usually norway maple, and
may be numerous at times. High populations can
cause leaf drop. Another sign of heavy aphid
infestation is honey dew on lower leaves and objects
beneath the tree. Aphids are controlled by spraying or
they may be left alone. If not sprayed, predatory
insects will bring the aphid population under control.
Scales are an occasional problem on maples.
Perhaps the most common is cottony maple scale. The
insect forms a cottony mass on the lower sides of
branches. Scales are usually controlled with
horticultural oil sprays. Scales may also be controlled
with well-timed sprays to kill the crawlers.
If borers become a problem it is an indication the
tree is not growing well. Controlling borers involves
keeping trees healthy. Chemical controls of existing
infestations are more difficult. Proper control involves
identification of the borer infesting the tree then
applying insecticides at the proper time.
Diseases
Scorch occurs during periods of high temperatures
accompanied by wind. Trees with diseased or
inadequate root systems will also show scorching.
When trees do not get enough water they scorch.
Scorch symptoms are light brown or tan dead areas
between leaf veins. The symptoms are on all parts of
the tree or only on the side exposed to sun and wind.
Scorching due to dry soil may be overcome by
watering. If scorching is due to an inadequate or
diseased root system, watering may have no effect.
Nutrient deficiency symptoms are yellow or
yellowish-green leaves with darker green veins. The
most commonly deficient nutrient on maple is
manganese. Implanting capsules containing a
manganese source in the trunk will alleviate the
symptoms. Test soil samples to determine if the soil
pH is too high for best manganese availability. Plants
Acer palmatum -- Japanese Maple Page 4
exposed to weed killers may also show similar
symptoms.
Tar spot and a variety of leaf spots cause some
concern among homeowners but are rarely serious
enough for control.