Fact Sheet ST-58
November 1993
Acoelorrhaphe wrightii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Paurotis Palm.
Paurotis Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This striking fan palm has several to many showy,
upright, slender trunks which form attractive tight
clumps with multiple suckers clustered at the base
(Fig. 1). This ensures that there are trunks of different
heights on the palm at all times if suckers are not
pruned off. Remove the suckers to prevent formation
of additional trunks. The two to three-foot-wide
fronds are green above and silvery below borne on
orange-green, armed petioles. Black, 0.25-inch fruit
are borne on bright orange stalks which can be quite
showy in the fall. Eventually reaching a height of 25
feet with a variable spread, the slow-growing Paurotis
Palm is highly desirable in the landscape. Paurotis
Palm is exceptionally attractive with nighttime lighting
from below.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Acoelorrhaphe wrightii
Pronunciation: ah-see-loe-RAY-fee RITE-ee-eye
Common name(s): Paurotis Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; specimen
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-58, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Acoelorrhaphe wrightii -- Paurotis Palm Page 2
Crown shape: palm; upright
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 18 to 36 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Acoelorrhaphe wrightii -- Paurotis Palm Page 3
Drought tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of Paurotis Palm.
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
A native of the Florida Everglades, Paurotis Palm
is hardy to about 25 to 28-degrees F. and prefers rich,
moist locations. Growing in full sun or partial shade,
growth is considerably slower in drier soils and could
decline and die without irrigation on a dry, welldrained site. Paurotis Palm is tolerant of salt spray. It
is popular as an accent or specimen for large
residential, commercial or municipal landscapes where
this beautiful palm can be seen in an open setting.
Unfortunately, it grows slowly and is hard to come by
in the trade. Set it in a bed of plumbago or other
sprawling shrub or groundcover to create a striking
accent.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Paurotis Palm is susceptible to chlorosis from
micronutrient deficiencies (especially Mn) when grown
in soil with a high pH. It also shows potassium
deficiencies.