Fact Sheet ST-64
November 1993
Aesculus pavia
Figure 1. Young Red Buckeye.
Red Buckeye1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Red Buckeye is a small North American native
tree, capable of reaching 25 to 30 feet tall in the wild
though is most often at 15 to 20 feet high when grown
in cultivation (Fig. 1). Red Buckeye is most popular
for its springtime display of three to six-inch-long,
upright, terminal panicles composed of 1.5-inch-wide,
red flowers which are quite attractive to
hummingbirds. These blooms are followed by flat,
round capsules which contain bitter and poisonous
seeds. The large, dark green, palmate leaves usually
offer no great color change in fall and often drop as
early as late September.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Aesculus pavia
Pronunciation: ESS-kew-lus PAY-vee-uh
Common name(s): Red Buckeye
Family: Hippocastanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation plant;
shade tree; specimen; residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-64, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Aesculus pavia -- Red Buckeye Page 2
Texture: coarse
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: double serrate; serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Aesculus pavia -- Red Buckeye Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Red Buckeye.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The coarse, open structure and the light brown,
flaky bark is quite attractive and offers great winter
landscape interest. Branches arise from the typically
straight trunk at a wide angle forming a durable
structure. There are many, small-diameter branches
with an occasional upright, aggressive one growing as
large as the trunk. Main branches begin forming low
on the trunk and remain there when grown in the full
sun.
The tree is best used as a novelty patio tree or as
part of a shrubbery border to add bright red color for
several weeks in the spring and coarse texture during
the rest of the year. Plant it in a medium- to largesized residential landscape as a very coarse accent.
Extremely coarse in winter without leaves, Red
Buckeye will attract attention with the bright brown or
tan bark reflecting the rays of the sun. Lower
branches can be removed to allow for clearance
beneath the crown, but the tree looks its best planted
in the open to allow branches to fully develop to the
ground.
Red Buckeye will flower well in rather dense
shade but takes on its best form when grown in full
sun with some afternoon shade on moist, well-drained
soil. It is native along moist stream banks and is not
very drought-tolerant.
The cultivar ‘Atrosanguinea’ has deeper red
flowers; ‘Humilis’ is a low or prostrate shrub with
small panicles of red flowers. Hybrids between
Aesculus pavia x Aesculus sylvatica have been seen,
bearing red and yellow flowers.
Red Buckeye is easily grown from seed, with
plants flowering after three years.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.