Fact Sheet ST-65
November 1993
Aesculus x carnea
Figure 1. Middle-aged Red Horsechestnut.
Red Horsechestnut1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This hybrid of Aesculus hippocastanum and
Aesculus pavia has very large, dark green leaves
composed of five to seven leaflets, and will ultimately
reach a height and spread of 30 to 40 feet (Fig. 1).
Although deciduous, Red Horsechestnut does not
produce any appreciable fall color and is well-suited
for use as a specimen. The tree is quite striking with
dark green, coarse-textured foliage. Pyramidal in
shape when very young, Red Horsechestnut develops
slowly into a round, very dense shade tree by five to
seven years of age, and is outstanding in the landscape
for its beautiful springtime display of blossoms. The
multitude of pink to bright scarlet blooms appear on
erect, eight-inch-long panicles at each branch tip and
are quite attractive to bees and hummingbirds. The
prickly, rather messy, poisonous seedpods appear in
fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Aesculus x carnea
Pronunciation: ESS-kew-lus x KAR-nee-uh
Common name(s): Red Horsechestnut
Family: Hippocastanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; screen; shade tree; narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 45 feet
Spread: 30 to 45 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-65, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Aesculus x carnea -- Red Horsechestnut Page 2
Growth rate: slow
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: oblanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; red
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Aesculus x carnea -- Red Horsechestnut Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Red Horsechestnut.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Leaf and flower litter in the summer and fall may
be objectionable to some people since the leaves are
large and decompose slowly. The nuts make good
food for wildlife but you may not want it scattered
along city streets. They can make great ammunition
for throwing at moving objects, windows and other
people so locate it accordingly. Makes a great median
street tree when provided with some irrigation during
drought.
Red Horsechestnut will grow in full sun or light
shade and prefers moist, well-drained, acid soils but
grows in slightly alkaline soil. Plants are moderately
tolerant to drought, wind, and salt and resist the heat
of the south very well. It holds up well in urban
areas, even in restricted and compacted soil spaces.
Red Horsechestnut appears to be less susceptible to
disease than either of the parents. Trunk bark may
crack when exposed to the direct sun so keep it shaded
as much as possible by leaving lower branches on
small trees and don’t over-prune the tree, exposing the
trunk suddenly to direct sun.
The cultivar ‘Briotii’ has deep scarlet flowers in
10-inch-long panicles and no fruit; ‘Rosea’ has pink
flowers. ‘O’Neil’s Red’ has double red flowers.
Propagation is from seed, an oddity for most
hybrids.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Much
less susceptible to leaf scorch and leaf blotch than
Aesculus hippocastanum, and should be planted in its
place.