Fact Sheet ST-61
November 1993
Aesculus hippocastanum
Figure 1. Mature Horsechestnut.
Horsechestnut1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Horsechestnut can grow 90 or 100 feet tall, but is
often 50 to 75 feet in the landscape with a spread of
40 to 50 feet (Fig. 1). The trunk grows to three feet
thick and is covered with dark, somewhat exfoliating
bark. The prominent white flowers, occurring in
panicles at the branch tips, are the main ornamental
feature of Horsechestnut. The large brown nuts
covered with spiny husks fall and can dent cars and
create a hazard on hard surfaces as people roll on the
golfball-sized fruit.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Aesculus hippocastanum
Pronunciation: ESS-kew-lus hip-oh-kass-TAY-num
Common name(s): Horsechestnut, European
Horsechestnut
Family: Hippocastanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: screen; shade tree; specimen; residential street
tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 80 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-61, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Aesculus hippocastanum -- Horsechestnut Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: double serrate
Leaflet shape: obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Aesculus hippocastanum -- Horsechestnut Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Horsechestnut.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The growth rate is rapid while the tree is young
but slows down with age. Horsechestnut is weakwooded and some branches break from the trunk under
ice or snow loads. The tree usually develops leaf
scorch in dry soil, and powdery mildew during the
summer, causing leaves to drop. Leaf blotch disease is
also common. This limits its wide use in any one
area, but any landscape would benefit from a
Horsechestnut or two. It is also very tolerant of city
conditions and does well in small, restricted root zone
areas such as along streets. Sensitivity to air pollution
injury makes it unsuited for downtown areas - best in
the suburbs.
Horsechestnut prefers a sunny exposure sheltered
from wind but casts dense shade with coarse-textured
leaves. The tree is easily transplanted and grows in
almost any urban soil, including alkaline. The large
leaves, nuts and dropping twigs create litter which is
considered by many to be objectionable. It is probably
best located away from hard surfaces where people can
enjoy it from a distance. Only moderately droughttolerant. Will grow in calcareous soil.
Several cultivars can be found but they will still
have leaf scorch problems: ‘Baumannii’ - 70 feet tall,
oval, pH-adapted, has double flowers, grows slower
and does not produce any nuts, if the tree is grown
this cultivar is highly recommended; ‘Pendula’ - has
drooping branches; ‘Pyramidalis’ - upright;
‘Rubicunda’ - flowers salmon red; ‘Tortuosa’ -
contorted growth.
Pests
White-marked tussock moth is a fuzzy caterpillar.
The insect has black marks and four tufts of hair on its
back.
Japanese beetle eats the leaves down to the veins.
Leaves at the top and south side of the plant are often
most affected and attacks can be quite sudden.
Diseases
Leaf blotch causes diseased areas of variable size
on the leaves. The diseased areas are at first
discolored and watersoaked, later turning light reddish
brown with bright yellow margins. If the entire leaf is
affected it will dry, turn brown, and fall off. Leaf
stalks may also be attacked. This disease looks very
much like scorch from dry soil and is prevalent over a
wide geographical area. Rake up and destroy old
leaves.
A leaf spot disease will cause small brown circular
spots on the leaves.
Powdery mildew covers the undersides of the
leaves with white mold.
Anthracnose may infect terminal shoots several
inches from the tip. The infected area is shrunken and
the outer layers of tissue may be ruptured.
Leaf scorch is a physiological problem but will not
kill the tree. The leaf margins turn brown then
browning moves progressively inward between the
veins. Eventually the entire leaf turns brown. The
condition occurs in mid-summer. Keep the plant
Aesculus hippocastanum -- Horsechestnut Page 4
well-watered during dry weather.