Fact Sheet ST-59
November 1993
Aesculus flava
Figure 1. Middle-aged Yellow Buckeye.
Yellow Buckeye1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Yellow Buckeye reaches 60 to 75 feet in height
with an oval to slightly spreading canopy and large,
dark green leaves composed of five-fingered leaflets,
casting dense shade below (Fig. 1). The thick canopy
makes this tree well-suited for a tall screen or shade
tree. Small yellow/green flowers appear in dense,
upwardly-pointing, six to seven-inch-long, terminal
panicles in early spring and are followed by 2.5-inchlong, smooth, pear-shaped capsules containing bitter,
poisonous seeds. The leaves change to brilliant yellow
before dropping in autumn.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Aesculus flava
Pronunciation: ESS-kew-lus FLAY-vuh
Common name(s): Yellow Buckeye, Sweet Buckeye
Family: Hippocastanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
screen; shade tree; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 75 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-59, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Aesculus flava -- Yellow Buckeye Page 2
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval)
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Aesculus flava -- Yellow Buckeye Page 3
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Figure 3. Foliage of Yellow Buckeye.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree has a striking, coarse texture and leaves
which are as dark as any other tree, attracting attention
as a specimen plant. But save it for large areas so the
wonderful form of this large tree can be appreciated.
Certainly not suited for small residences due to its
overpowering size and texture. Leaf and flower litter
in the summer and fall may be objectionable to some
people. The nuts make good food for wildlife but you
may not want it scattered along city streets.
A North American native, Yellow Buckeye grows
best along stream beds in full sun or partial shade and
should be planted in moist, well-drained soil rich in
organic matter. It is not as susceptible to foliage
diseases as Aesculus hippocastanum.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern are known
at this time.