Fact Sheet ST-63
November 1993
Aesculus indica
Figure 1. Mature Indian Horsechestnut.
Indian Horsechestnut1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Indian Horsechestnut is a large, rounded tree,
reaching up to 100 feet in height, with nine-inch-long
leaves and smooth, grayish-red bark (Fig. 1). Trees
grown in an open landscape setting probably reach
about 40 to 60 feet tall. In June and July, the tree is
decorated with upright panicles of white blooms, the
flowers stalks most often seen four to six inches high
but they may be much larger. These blooms are
followed by the production of a spiny, green fruit
which holds several brown seeds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Aesculus indica
Pronunciation: ESS-kew-lus IN-dih-kuh
Common name(s): Indian Horsechestnut
Family: Hippocastanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate; undulate
Leaflet shape: obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-63, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Aesculus indica -- Indian Horsechestnut Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Aesculus indica -- Indian Horsechestnut Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Indian Horsechestnut.
The tree has not been extensively available, but
could make a nice park or landscape tree for a large
commercial landscape or an estate. It has been
successfully grown in California and in the northwest
part of the United States, and could be tried in the
east. The cold hardiness of the plant is uncertain. The
coarse texture, low branching habit and uniformly
round canopy make it stand out among other trees.
Children would enjoy climbing this well-branched tree.
The beauty of this tree calls for some trials in the
eastern part of the country.
The cultivar ‘Sydney Pearce’ has richer green
leaves and flower-spikes 12 inches high.
Pests and Diseases
The pests and diseases affecting this tree are not
well understood due to the limited experience with this
tree.