Fact Sheet ST-67
November 1993
Ailanthus altissima
Figure 1. Mature Tree-of-Heaven.
Tree-of-Heaven1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This non-native deciduous tree will rapidly grow
to 70 to 100 feet in height and produces an open
canopy of stout branches covered with one to threefoot-long, pinnately compound, dark green leaves (Fig.
1). Broken stems smell of rancid peanut butter, and
males reportedly smell worse than female trees. The
leaves turn only slightly yellow in fall before
dropping. The small, green, male and female flowers
are produced on separate trees and appear in dense,
terminal clusters. The 1.5-inch-long, yellow to
red/brown, winged fruits which follow the blossoms
will persist on the tree in dense clusters throughout the
fall and into the winter months, and are quite
attractive. They can create a crunchy mess when they
fall to the ground. Seeds sprout easily and seedlings
usually invade surrounding land.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ailanthus altissima
Pronunciation: ay-LANTH-us al-TISS-sim-muh
Common name(s): Tree-of-Heaven
Family: Simaroubaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 75 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: ciliate
Leaflet shape: ovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-67, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ailanthus altissima -- Tree-of-Heaven Page 2
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: orange; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Ailanthus altissima -- Tree-of-Heaven Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Tree-of-Heaven.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Tree-of-Heaven performs best in full sun on welldrained, moist soil but this is a tree that will survive
almost anywhere, under any cultural conditions -
smoke, dust, hot, cold, wet, or dry. It has been known
to appear in cracks of pavement or even trash piles,
and it will survive where no other trees will grow.
Spreading rapidly by seed and suckers, Tree-of-Heaven
is viewed by many as a pest- and weed-tree. But if
well cared for, this tree can persist for a long time.
Large specimens are known to grow trunks up to five
feet in diameter.
Propagation is by seed and suckers.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern, except for
verticillium wilt.