Fact Sheet ST-70
November 1993
Alnus glutinosa
Figure 1. Mature Common Alder.
Common Alder1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A popular tree of moist to wet soils, common
alder is a moderate to fast-growing (two feet per year)
deciduous tree which usually grows to 40 to 50 feet in
height with a 20 to 40-foot spread and a 12 to 18-inch
trunk but is capable of reaching 80 feet in height in
the woods (Fig. 1). It is not native but has escaped
from cultivation and will form pure stands or thickets
in disturbed wet sites. Pyramidal when young,
common alder often has multiple stems making it ideal
for use as a screen or specimen, the trees eventually
becoming more rounded or oval as they mature. The
two to four-inch-wide, dark green, roundish leaves
with toothed edges and pale undersides are joined in
spring by rather insignificant male and female flowers.
Foliage remains green well into the fall. It is the fruits
which are most interesting, small, nutlike, one-inch
"cones" which persist throughout the fall and winter,
long after the darkening leaves have fallen. These
fruits, along with the attractive, dark brown, furrowed
bark and multi-stemmed growth habit, make common
alder an attractive landscape specimen throughout the
winter. The fruits are food for a variety of wildlife.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Alnus glutinosa
Pronunciation: AL-nus gloo-tih-N0-suh
Common name(s): Common Alder, Black Alder,
European Alder
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; screen; shade tree; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-70, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Alnus glutinosa -- Common Alder Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 20 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: orbiculate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: purple; red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Alnus glutinosa -- Common Alder Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Common Alder.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
A good plant for establishing along stream banks
to stabilize soil and add interest, alder can also be used
as a specimen in a more formal landscape where wet
soil challenges most other plants. It can be pruned to
one central leader or used as a multi-stemmed
specimen. Branches on central-leadered trees form
attractive horizontal layers unlike most other trees.
Similar to the dogwoods in this respect.
Unfortunately, it is usually not grown in nurseries but
nursery operators should be encouraged to grow this
adaptable tree.
Common alder will grow easily in full sun or
partial shade in almost any landscape setting since the
trees are able to "fix" nitrogen, or take it out of the
soil atmosphere, enabling these trees to grow in the
poorest and wettest soils where other trees might fail.
Common alder will grow best in wet or moist soils,
acid or alkaline, and have even been observed growing
with roots submerged in water, but it is also tolerant of
moderate drought, compaction, and urban stress.
Common alder transplants easily and will seed itself
into an area creating a thicket if it is planted and left
alone in an area which is not maintained.
Cultivars include: ‘Aurea’, golden yellow leaves;
‘Fastigiata’ - narrow, upright form; ‘Laciniata’ leaves
not as deeply lobed, vigorous growth; ‘Pyramidalis’,
upright or columnar form to 50 feet tall, 25 feet wide.
Propagation is by seed. Cultivars are grafted onto
seedling root stock.
Pests
Leaf miners, tent caterpillars. Tent caterpillars can
cause significant defoliation but trees normally
recover.
Diseases
Powdery mildew and cankers but these are usually
not serious.