Fact Sheet ST-72
November 1993
Alnus rhombifolia
Figure 1. Middle-aged White Alder.
White Alder1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A North American native commonly found along
streams, White Alder is a quick-growing tree (to 30
inches per year) reaching 50 to 75 feet in height,
sometimes up to 100 feet, and has a spread of 30 to 40
feet (Fig. 1). The deciduous four-inch-long, glossy
leaves are dark green above and lighter below and
appear just after the springtime display of the six-inchlong, greenish-yellow catkins. These flowers are
followed by the appearance of brown, cone-like fruits
which persist on the tree throughout most of the year
and are quite popular for use in dried flower
arrangements. White Alder creates an interesting
specimen during the winter with a straight trunk,
persistent fruits, attractive silver/grey bark, and
slender, horizontal branches with pendulous tips. The
crown takes on a pyramidal shape in youth becoming
more oval with age. Any necessary pruning should be
done in winter or early spring. Once chosen, the
central leader dominates the tree forming a pyramidal
crown shape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Alnus rhombifolia
Pronunciation: AL-nus rom-bih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): White Alder
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 75 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-72, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Alnus rhombifolia -- White Alder Page 2
Growth rate: fast
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Alnus rhombifolia -- White Alder Page 3
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
Figure 3. Foliage of White Alder.
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
White Alder will grow easily in full sun or partial
shade in any moist soil and will happily tolerate the
wettest conditions. It is usually not grown or offered
by nurseries in the eastern U.S. but is common in
some areas of California.
Propagation is by fresh seeds or by cuttings.
Pests
White Alder is attacked and killed by the
flatheaded borer in California. This borer is closely
related to the bronze birch borer. Prune infested
branches during late summer and fall when the
infestation is visible and easy to detect and the beetle
does not fly. Avoid pruning in the spring.
Tent caterpillars.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.