Fact Sheet ST-74
November 1993
Amelanchier canadensis
Figure 1. Young Shadblow Serviceberry.
Shadblow Serviceberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Downy Serviceberry is an upright, twiggy, multistemmed large shrub, eventually reaching 20 to 25 feet
in height with a spread of 15 to 20 feet (Fig. 1). This
North American native is usually the first to be noticed
in the forest or garden at springtime, the pure white,
glistening flowers some of the earliest to appear
among the many other dull brown, leafless, and stillslumbering trees. The small white flowers are
produced in dense, erect, two to three-inch-long
racemes, opening up to a delicate display before the
attractive reddish-purple buds unfold into small,
rounded leaves. These leaves are covered with a fine,
soft grey fuzz when young, giving the plant its
common name, but will mature into smooth, dark
green leaves later. Following the blooms are many
small, luscious, dark red/purple, sweet and juicy,
apple-shaped fruits, often well-hidden by the dark
green leaves, and which would be popular with people
were they not so quickly consumed by birds and other
wildlife who seem to find their flavor irresistible.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Amelanchier canadensis
Pronunciation: am-meh-LANG-kee-er
kan-uh-DEN-sis
Common name(s): Shadblow Serviceberry, Downy
Serviceberry
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; near a deck
or patio; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-74, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Amelanchier canadensis -- Shadblow Serviceberry Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Amelanchier canadensis -- Shadblow Serviceberry Page 3
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Shadblow Serviceberry.
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
When the shortened days of autumn arrive, Downy
Serviceberry is alive with a variety of colorful hues,
from yellow and gold, to orange and deep red. Downy
Serviceberry is ideal for planting in the naturalized
garden where it can be allowed to spread by its
naturally-suckering habit, or is striking when placed in
the mixed shrubbery border where its brilliant white
blooms and fall color stand out nicely against a
background of evergreen shrubs. The light shade cast
by the open crown makes the tree well-suited for
planting as a specimen near the deck or patio.
With a native habitat of wet bogs and swamps,
Downy Serviceberry should be grown in full sun or
light shade on moist, well-drained, acid soil. Plants
will rarely require any pruning or fertilizing, except if
thinning of the multiple stems is desired to ‘clean up’
the bottom of the plant.
Propagation is by seeds after cold-stratification.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.