Fact Sheet ST-73
November 1993
Amelanchier arborea
Figure 1. Middle-aged Downy Serviceberry.
Downy Serviceberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Downy Serviceberry grows 25 to 40 feet tall and
can spread to 20 feet (Fig. 1). This native large shrub
or small tree has a moderate growth rate in most soils.
Multiple stems are upright and highly branched
forming a dense shrub with many small-diameter
branches or, if properly pruned, a small tree. Trees
can be trained to, and are offered by nurseries, with
one trunk. The main ornamental features are white
flowers followed by purple fruit in late spring or early
summer. Fruits are produced before the leaves in
spring and are quickly eaten by birds. Serviceberry
puts on a brilliant fall color display ranging from
yellow and orange to dull red. This tree is suitable for
naturalistic plantings and will attract birds. The tree
suckers from the base of the trunk, which can be a
maintenance problem in urban plantings or in formal
landscapes.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Amelanchier arborea
Pronunciation: am-meh-LANG-kee-er
ar-BORE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Downy Serviceberry, Juneberry
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); near a deck or patio; narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; upright; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-73, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Amelanchier arborea -- Downy Serviceberry Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; no significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Amelanchier arborea -- Downy Serviceberry Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of Downy Serviceberry.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although native trees are often found growing
along stream banks as an understory tree, they also
tolerate drier, rockier soils, and grow well in urban
areas. They may lose some leaves in drought to avoid
injury in dry weather. They are well-suited for
planting in shrub borders and in wet soils. Their small
stature and moderately-slow growth rate make it
ideally suited for planting beneath power lines, if
provided with some irrigation during drought.
Pests
Cambium miners cause concern when noticed but
are not very damaging to the tree. The mines can
extend from a twig all the way down to the roots. The
mines form light-colored lines in the bark. No
controls are usually suggested.
A leaf miner will mine leaves, particularly the
lower half of the leaf. The mines are irregular in
shape.
The leaves of amelanchier are skeletonized by at
least two insects. The first insect forms small cocoons
on the undersides of leaves. Skeletonized leaves look
as though they have windows in them after the insects
scrape tissue off the top and bottom of the leaves.
The second insect is the larva of the pear sawfly. The
larvae are black to greenish black and look slimy.
Adult sawflies lay eggs in early and late summer.
Heavily skeletonized leaves drop off.
Several borers attack amelanchier. Healthy trees
are considered less susceptible so regular fertilization
and watering during dry spells will help prevent borer
attacks.
Spider mites will feed on amelanchier. These
insects are hard to detect as they are so small. The
main symptom of mite injury is the loss of green leaf
coloration. If the infestation is heavy, very fine
webbing may be seen. Horticultural oil sprays help
control mite infestations.
Aphids of several types suck juices from
amelanchier. Heavy infestations cause distortion of
the foliage and new growth, and deposit large amounts
of sticky honeydew on lower foliage. Black sooty
mold will grow on the honeydew.
Amelanchier arborea -- Downy Serviceberry Page 4
Diseases
Witches broom, also called black mildew, infects
the growing point causing the formation of many
stems. The cluster of stems is called the witches
broom. Another symptom is a black fungal growth,
coating the undersides of the leaves. The damage to
the tree is usually not serious and the brooms can be
pruned off. No chemical controls are suggested.
Leaf blight can cause leaf drop when a severe
infection occurs. The disease causes small purple
spots on the leaves. The spots enlarge and turn brown,
later a small black dot will be seen in the center of the
spot. Large numbers of spots cause infected leaves to
drop.
Fire blight is characterized by the sudden wilting
and death of branch tips. The blossoms wilt, blacken
and hang on the twig. The bark is shriveled and has
small bumps or blisters on it. Sometimes gum oozes
out of the infected area and a crack forms between the
diseased and healthy bark. Control with chemicals is
difficult. Diseased branches should be pruned out.
Make the cut at least four inches beyond the diseased
area. Disinfect pruning tools with bleach between
cuts. Fertilizing heavily with nitrogen increases
susceptibility to fire blight.
Powdery mildews of several types cause white
powdery growth on the leaves of amelanchier. Late in
the season no controls may be needed.
Fruit rot be a problem in wet weather. The fruits
are often eaten by birds so may not be around long
enough to become diseased.
Cedar rusts can be troublesome.