Fact Sheet ST-80
November 1993
Aralia spinosa
Figure 1. Mature Devils-Walkingstick.
Devils-Walkingstick1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Anyone who has accidentally brushed against a
Devil’s-Walkingstick does not soon forget the
experience, for this tall, spindly native shrub or small
tree is armed up and down its thin trunk with
extremely sharp, treacherous spines (Fig. 1). Even the
huge, much-divided leaves, which can reach four feet
long and three feet wide, are armed with pointed
prickles, ready to scratch anyone who comes within
range. But when placed in an area where they can do
no harm, Devil’s-Walkingsticks add a tropical effect to
a mixed shrubbery border or other naturalized setting,
where the large leaves can easily spread out to their
full length atop the slender, 10 to 15-foot-tall trunks.
Under ideal conditions, these small trees can even
reach 25 to 30 feet tall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Aralia spinosa
Pronunciation: uh-RAIL-ee-uh spy-NO-suh
Common name(s): Devils-Walkingstick,
Hercules-Club
Family: Araliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; odd pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-80, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Aralia spinosa -- Devils-Walkingstick Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; red
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; thorns are
present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Aralia spinosa -- Devils-Walkingstick Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Devils-Walkingstick.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The young leaves of Devil’s-Walkingstick are
bronze-colored, green in summer but return to a
bronze/red mottled with some yellow before dropping
in fall. As striking as the thorns are the large,
summertime panicles of bloom, 12 to 18 inches in
diameter and up to three feet long, held above the
crown of leaves for about 10 days and gently draping
outward under the weight of the flower head.
Following these blooms is the production of a great
quantity of dark, purple-black, juicy berries which are
exceptionally popular with birds.
Devil’s-Walkingstick is quite easy to grow and
literally thrives on neglect. Plants should be grown in
full sun or partial shade on any almost any kind of
soil, acid or alkaline, moist or dry, as long as it is
well-drained, and it is frequently found along stream
banks and road sides. Devil’s-Walkingstick grows
rapidly and usually spreads by sprouts produced from
its base, eventually creating an impenetrable thicket if
left to its own devices. While the temptation would be
to use this plant as a barrier planting, the effect of the
thorned, naked trunks during wintertime is quite harsh
and perhaps unattractive to some people. The plant
can be trained into a small, single or multi-stemmed
tree and used in a shrubbery border to add height and
interest, or left to create a thicket. It is not normally
available in nurseries. It can be transplanted during
winter and used as a specimen in an out-of-the-way
place where it is sure to capture the curiosity of many
visitors, particularly when it is in flower.
Propagation is by seed, sucker-division, or root
cuttings, and plants are easily transplanted. A smaller,
non-thorny selection of this plant would make a nice,
native alternative to the ever-popular nandina shrub.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.