Fact Sheet ST-85
November 1993
Arbutus unedo
Figure 1. Mature Strawberry-Tree.
Strawberry-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Most often seen as a multi-stemmed, rounded,
evergreen shrub or small tree reaching 8 to 15 feet in
height with an equal spread, Strawberry-Tree is
capable of reaching 20 to 25 feet in height, and makes
a very attractive specimen tree when pruned to a short,
single trunk (Fig. 1). The trees take on a picturesque,
somewhat twisted appearance over time, and exhibit
dark, red/brown, flaking and shreddy bark
accompanied by the lush, dark green, leathery, redstemmed leaves. Growth rate is slow so trees over 20
feet tall are rare.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Arbutus unedo
Pronunciation: ar-BEW-tus YOO-nee-doe
Common name(s): Strawberry-Tree
Family: Ericaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; screen; specimen;
residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 8 to 18 feet
Spread: 8 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: oblanceolate; obovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-85, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Arbutus unedo -- Strawberry-Tree Page 2
Leaf venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; showy; winter
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Arbutus unedo -- Strawberry-Tree Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Strawberry-Tree.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
In fall and winter, the small, white or pink blooms
in two-inch-long panicles appear at the same time the
previous-year’s fruit are ripening. These unusual fruits
have a rough, pebbled outer surface which ripen from
yellow to red and persist on the tree throughout the
winter, adding much to the tree’s overall attractiveness.
Although the fruits look appealing, their bland taste
seems to be popular only with birds.
Strawberry-Tree spreads quite wide as it grows
taller and produces dense shade, making it ideal for
use as a small shade, screen, hedge, or patio tree. The
appearance of both fruits and flowers during the winter
months also makes this plant very popular for
specimen plantings. It is one of the most attractive
small trees available for residential use but
unfortunately is not normally available in the east. It
should be grown and tried in the Deep South.
Strawberry-Tree will grow at a slow pace when
planted in either full sun or partial shade on welldrained, acid soil. Plants are tolerant of wind and
some drought once established and grow in welldrained clay.
The cultivar ‘Compacta’ is a smaller shrub, six to
ten feet tall and wide; ‘Elfin King’ has a contorted,
dwarf form, flowers and fruits year-round; ‘Rubra’ has
deep pink flowers.
Propagation is by seed or layering.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.