Fact Sheet ST-84
November 1993
Arbutus texana
Figure 1. Mature Texas Madrone.
Texas Madrone1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American evergreen tree has
beautiful peeling bark and reaches a height of 40 feet
but many trees are much smaller than this (Fig. 1). As
the tree ages, the outer bark drops off to reveal the
smooth, new bark which can range in color from
white, apricot, tan, or dark red, and the mixture of
colors between old and new bark is quite striking.
The dark green leaves, with paler undersides, are
joined in springtime with small, white flowers which
have an interesting shape, almost like small lanterns.
These blooms are followed by the production of
orange or red berries which ripen in fall. Berries are
very brightly colored and will attract attention in any
landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Arbutus texana
Pronunciation: ar-BEW-tus teck-SAY-nuh
Common name(s): Texas Madrone
Family: Ericaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; shade tree; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street
tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-84, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Arbutus texana -- Texas Madrone Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: upright; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; entire
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Arbutus texana -- Texas Madrone Page 3
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Multiple trunks arise from the ground much like
those of crape myrtle. Lower foliage and branches are
often removed to show off this feature. Plant this tree
to display the trunks near a patio, deck, walk or other
area where people come close to the tree. A row of
Texas Madrone planted on 15 to 20 foot centers can
enlighten the entry way to an office park,
condominium complex, or add character to a
residential street.
Texas Madrone grows in full sun on any welldrained soil, acid or alkaline. It appears to be a very
adaptable tree and should do well in a variety of
landscape sites.
Propagation is by seed or micropropagation.
Improved selections can probably be developed
through micropropagation techniques.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.