Fact Sheet ST-86
November 1993
Asimina triloba
Figure 1. Young Pawpaw.
Pawpaw1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native deciduous tree, the coarse-textured
Pawpaw ultimately reaches 30 feet in height (more
commonly 15 to 20 feet) with an equal spread, and
creates an upright, wide pyramidal silhouette (Fig. 1).
The large, dark green leaves, 6 to 12 inches in length
and three to five inches wide, seem to droop from
their weight at branch tips, giving the plant a
distinctive, almost wilted appearance. Leaves turn a
sometimes-brilliant yellow before dropping in the fall.
The two-inch-wide purple flowers with the less-thanpleasant perfume appear before the leaves unfurl in
springtime, and are followed by the production of
unusual, fleshy, three to five-inch-long, round or oval
fruits, green when young but ripening to a
brown/black, wrinkled texture. When fully ripe, the
edible flesh becomes soft, almost custard-like, has a
sweet, rich taste similar to bananas, and is surprisingly
very nutritious. The fruits are popular with man and
wildlife, especially raccoons and birds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Asimina triloba
Pronunciation: uh-SIM-min-nuh try-LOE-buh
Common name(s): Pawpaw
Family: Annonaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: fruit tree; reclamation plant; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-86, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Asimina triloba -- Pawpaw Page 2
Texture: coarse
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: purple
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Asimina triloba -- Pawpaw Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Pawpaw.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The Pawpaw tree will grow in full sun or dense
shade but will have denser growth in the sun.
Branches arch and reach to the sun in shaded sites
often creating an open, irregularly-shaped canopy.
The soil should be rich, moist and slightly acid, and
the trees will even tolerate wet, soggy soils. It can be
found in multi-stemmed thickets along stream banks
and on flood plains in the wild. The tree is probably
best used in a natural area for stabilizing stream banks
and to add yellow fall color to a landscape. It also
makes a great coarse-textured specimen.
Propagation is by seeds, layerings, or root cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.