Fact Sheet ST-91
November 1993
Bauhinia spp.
Figure 1. Middle-aged Orchid-Tree.
Orchid-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This deciduous to semi-evergreen tree has a vaseshaped, open canopy with lower branches removed
made up of large, bilobed, light green, papery leaves
(Fig. 1). Unpruned trees form a rounded crown. The
orchid-like blooms, in shades of purple, red, pink,
white, or yellow, are three to four inches across and
produced in abundance at various times of the year,
depending upon species. Orchid tree makes a
spectacular specimen or shade tree or fits well into
mixed shrubbery borders.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Bauhinia spp.
Pronunciation: bah-HIN-ee-uh species
Common name(s): Orchid-Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; shade tree; small parking
lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; cleft
Leaf shape: orbiculate
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous; evergreen;
semievergreen
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-91, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Bauhinia spp. -- Orchid-Tree Page 2
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; purple; red; white; yellow
Flower characteristics: very showy; year round
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Bauhinia spp. -- Orchid-Tree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Orchid-Tree.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing best in full sun or high, shifting pine
shade, orchid tree thrives in any well-drained soil but
in alkaline soils will show interveinal chlorosis
(yellowing) on the leaves. The flowers are followed
by many brown, woody, 12-inch-long seed pods which
are unattractive on the tree and a nuisance when they
drop. The wood tends to be weak and sprouts are
often seen growing from the base of the tree creating
an unkempt appearance. Some people consider the
fallen leaves messy because they are large and
decompose slowly.
In flower, orchid tree makes a beautiful street tree
affect with foliage and flowers arching over the road.
However, the drooping branches must be removed as
they develop, to allow for vehicle clearance beneath.
Because sprouts will have to be removed regularly and
the tree is bare for a month or two, this is considered
by many to be a high-maintenance tree not suited for
large-scale street tree planting. But it is a tough tree
growing in most soils with pH below 7.5.
Many species, cultivars, and varieties are
available. Bauhinia blakeana, the Hong Kong OrchidTree, is seedless and would not present such a litter
problem. It is also the most spectacular and most
wanted Bauhinia spp., bearing six-inch, orchid-like
flowers of rich reddish or rose purple during the winter
but is very tender to freezing temperatures. Bauhinia
variegata, most popular, produces in winter and spring
most nearly orchid-like blossoms of purplish casts or
pure white in cultivar ‘Candida’. Bauhinia purpurea,
most variable, produces narrow-petaled, red-purple to
blue-purple flowers in late fall and early winter while
leaves are on the trees. Bauhinia monandra produces
pink, single-stamened flowers all summer. Bauhinia
acuminata also blooms all summer but with white
flowers. Bauhinia aculeata, with white flowers, is
hardy as far north as hardiness USDA hardiness zone
8b but has a tendency to produce many root suckers.
Propagation is by seeds, or cuttings for the rare
types.
Pests
Chewing insects and borers may present a problem
for Orchid-Tree.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern. Interveinal
chlorosis occurs on high pH soil from micronutrient
deficiency.