Fact Sheet ST-87
November 1993
Bauhinia aculeata
Figure 1. Middle-aged White Orchid-Tree.
White Orchid-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
One of the hardiest of the bauhinias, White
Orchid-Tree is a deciduous to semi-evergreen tree
reaching 25 to 30 feet in height with interesting
twisted ascending branches which droop at the ends,
an often-leaning trunk, and large, bilobed, dark green
leaves (Fig. 1). The beautiful, white, three to fourinch-wide, orchid-like blooms appear in abundance
from spring through summer and are followed by flat,
dark brown seed pods. White Orchid-Tree makes a
spectacular vase-shaped specimen, shade, or patio tree,
or fits well into a mixed shrubbery border provided it
is grown in the full sun. The trees propagated from
seed vary in form when young from one individual to
the next so uniform plantings are difficult to achieve.
Trees become more uniform and symmetrical as they
grow older. Probably too messy and sensitive to
alkaline soil for a residential or downtown street tree
but would grow well and be suited for a median strip
where the debris would be washed away and less
noticeable. Growth in alkaline soil is usually fine, but
the leaves appear yellow between the veins.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Bauhinia aculeata
Pronunciation: bah-HIN-ee-uh ah-kew-lee-AY-tuh
Common name(s): White Orchid-Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; shade tree; small parking
lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-87, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Bauhinia aculeata -- White Orchid-Tree Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; cleft
Leaf shape: orbiculate
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; showy; spring
flowering; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Bauhinia aculeata -- White Orchid-Tree Page 3
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of White Orchid-Tree.
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Orchid-Tree benefits from some pruning early in
their life to increase branchiness and to produce a form
which will be suited for most landscapes. Left
unpruned, many trees are beautiful, forming multiple
trunks and branches close to the ground which is fine
for specimen use in a lawn area or other open-space
landscapes. Purchase trees with one trunk for parking
lot or other urban landscapes where vehicular
clearance will be necessary. Be sure to train branches
so they will grow up before they spread out. If this is
not done, lower branches will droop toward the ground
and they may have to be removed, disfiguring the tree.
Orchid trees drop fruit, small branches and leaves
periodically so some people consider it a messy tree.
But regularly fertilized, Orchid-Tree is a wonderful
flowering tree.
Growing in full sun or high, shifting pine shade,
Orchid-Tree thrives in any well-drained soil but in
alkaline soils will show interveinal chlorosis
(yellowing) on the leaves. Potassium deficiency shows
up as necrosis, magnesium deficiency as chlorosis.
Although tolerant of drought, White Orchid-Tree can
benefit from some afternoon shade, or irrigation, in
hot, dry weather to prevent the blooms from
shrivelling up. The flowers are followed by many
brown, woody seed pods which fill the tree and could
be considered unattractive on the tree in the winter and
a nuisance when they drop.
Propagation is by seed, suckers, layerings, or
cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Potassium, magnesium and micronutrient deficiencies
are common. Orchid-Tree seeds itself into the
landscape.