Fact Sheet ST-88
November 1993
Bauhinia blakeana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Hong Kong Orchid-Tree.
Hong Kong Orchid-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Growing 20 to 40 feet in height, Hong Kong
Orchid-Tree creates a rounded, spreading canopy
composed of large, six to eight-inch-diameter,
gray/green leaves (Fig. 1). Since young trees can be
irregularly shaped, pruning during the first several
years after propagation is often needed to develop a
more uniform crown. It is the beautiful display of
orchid-like blooms, though, which make Hong Kong
Orchid-Tree so desirable for the landscape, the large,
six-inch blossoms appearing in multiple shades of
purple, rose, and pink during the summer, fall and
early winter months, when little color is usually
present in the garden. These flowers are sterile and
will not set seed so the plant will not drop long pods
as other Orchid-Trees do, and they will not become a
pest in the landscape. This is often the Orchid-Tree of
choice for planting in urban landscapes.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Bauhinia blakeana
Pronunciation: bah-HIN-ee-uh blay-kee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Hong Kong Orchid-Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; shade tree; small parking
lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree
pit); residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 40 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-88, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Bauhinia blakeana -- Hong Kong Orchid-Tree Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; cleft
Leaf shape: orbiculate
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: purple; red
Flower characteristics: very showy; winter
flowering
Fruit
There is no fruit on this tree.
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Bauhinia blakeana -- Hong Kong Orchid-Tree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Hong Kong Orchid-Tree.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Some people object to the debris which always
seems to be falling from other Orchid-Trees, but this
one produces no fruit. It makes a beautiful specimen
planted in parks or on large properties. They are well
suited for planting along streets and in wide medians
along a boulevard.
Hong Kong Orchid-Tree grows in full sun on
well-drained soil. Trees are very drought-tolerant and
actually flower best on dry soils. Problems include a
tendency to show nutritional deficiencies, especially
potassium; the weak wood which is susceptible to
breakage in storms; and the litter problem created by
the falling leaves and flowers. Orchid-Tree may need
occasional pruning to maintain its shape.
Propagation is by cuttings or air-layering.
Pests
Borers, caterpillars, mites.
Diseases
Leaf spot, leaf scorch diseases.