Fact Sheet ST-89
November 1993
Bauhinia forficata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Brazilian Orchid-Tree.
Brazilian Orchid-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
One of the hardiest of the bauhinias, Brazilian
Orchid-Tree is a deciduous to semi-evergreen tree
reaching 25 to 30 feet in height with interesting
twisted ascending branches which droop at the ends,
an often-leaning trunk, and large, bilobed, dark green
leaves (Fig. 1). The beautiful, white, three to fourinch-wide, orchid-like blooms appear in abundance
from spring through summer and are followed by flat,
dark brown seed pods. Brazilian Orchid-Tree makes a
spectacular vase-shaped specimen, shade, or patio tree,
or fits well into a mixed shrubbery border. The trees
vary in form when young from one individual to the
next so uniform plantings are difficult to achieve.
Trees become more uniform and symmetrical as they
grow older. Probably too messy and sensitive to
alkaline soil for a residential or downtown street tree
but would grow well and be suited for a median strip
where the debris would be washed away and less
noticeable.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Bauhinia forficata
Pronunciation: bah-HIN-ee-uh for-fih-KAY-tuh
Common name(s): Brazilian Orchid-Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway; near
a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; cleft
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-89, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Bauhinia forficata -- Brazilian Orchid-Tree Page 2
Leaf shape: orbiculate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Bauhinia forficata -- Brazilian Orchid-Tree Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Brazilian Orchid-Tree.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Orchid trees benefit from some pruning early in
their life to increase branchiness and to produce a form
which will be suited for most landscapes. Left
unpruned, many trees are beautiful, forming multiple
trunks and branches close to the ground which is fine
for specimen use in a lawn area or other open-space
landscapes. Purchase trees with one trunk for parking
lot or other urban landscapes where vehicular
clearance will be necessary. Be sure to train branches
so they will grow up before they spread out. If this is
not done, lower branches will droop toward the ground
and they may have to be removed, disfiguring the tree.
Orchid trees drop fruit, small branches and leaves
periodically so some people consider it a messy tree.
But regularly fertilized in an acid soil, orchid tree is a
wonderful flowering tree.
Growing in full sun or high, shifting pine shade,
orchid tree thrives in any well-drained soil but in
alkaline soils will show interveinal chlorosis
(yellowing) on the leaves. Potassium deficiency shows
up as necrosis, magnesium deficiency as chlorosis.
Although tolerant of some drought, Brazilian OrchidTree should receive some afternoon shade, or
irrigation, in hot, dry weather to prevent the blooms
from shrivelling up. The flowers are followed by
many brown, woody, 12-inch-long seed pods which fill
the tree and could be considered unattractive on the
tree in the winter and a nuisance when they drop.
Propagation is by seed, suckers, layerings, or
cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Potassium, magnesium and micronutrient deficiencies
are common. Orchid tree seeds itself into the
landscape.