Fact Sheet ST-96
November 1993
Betula papyrifera
Figure 1. Young Paper Birch.
Paper Birch1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native to northern areas that is grown for its
beautiful white bark (Fig. 1). An additional
ornamental trait is the yellow fall leaf color. The tree
is best adapted to wet and moist sites -- watch out for
pests if grown in an unsuitable site. The tree will
grow to 50 feet or more and spread about half that
amount. Paper birch has excellent cold tolerance and
will grow in USDA hardiness zone 2. It is rarely
successful in zones warmer than USDA hardiness zone
six. In landscapes it may be grown as a single
stemmed tree or in a multi-stemmed clump.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Betula papyrifera
Pronunciation: BET-yoo-luh pap-ih-RIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Paper Birch, Canoe Birch
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 6 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 45 to 60 feet
Spread: 20 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-96, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Betula papyrifera -- Paper Birch Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown; green
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; should be grown with a single leader; very
showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.55
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Betula papyrifera -- Paper Birch Page 3
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
Figure 3. Foliage of Paper Birch.
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Pests
A light aphid infestation may not be serious but
heavy infestations cause distorted and stunted growth
and produce large amounts of honeydew. The
honeydew serves as a substrate for sooty mold.
Birch skeletonizer feeding causes leaf browning.
The skeletonizer larva is yellowish-green and one
quarter-inch-long.
Birch leaf miner is a common insect pest of birch.
A small white worm eats out the middle of the leaf
which turns brown. Severe attacks of birch leaf miner
predispose trees to bronze birch borer infestation. The
insect shows up in mid May but timing can vary from
one year to the next, and will vary according to your
location in the country. The first of two generations
per year is the most damaging.
The most serious pest of landscape birches is
bronze birch borer. Stressed trees are most susceptible
to borer attacks. The insect bores in the sapwood,
beginning in the top third of the tree, causing death of
the tree crown. The tunnels are slightly raised and
faintly rust colored. Emergence holes in the trunk are
shaped like capital D’s. Keep the trees healthy by
controlling other insects, fertilizing, and watering as
needed. Chemical control is applied to the trunk and
main branches. Timing of the first spray will vary
from year to year depending on weather conditions. A
commercial sprayer may be needed to apply the spray
adequately.
Diseases
Several fungi cause canker diseases on birch.
These diseases infect and kill sapwood causing sunken
areas on the trunk and larger branches. There is no
chemical control for canker diseases. Preventive
measures include keeping the tree healthy and
avoiding wounding. Regular fertilization will keep
birches vigorous and more resistant to cankers. Water
in dry weather to prevent water stress.
Dieback is characterized by a slow death of the
branches. The tree crown accumulates dead branches.
Injury caused by bronze birch borer is similar but far
more prevalent. Prevent dieback by maintaining tree
vigor with water and fertilizer. When the disease does
occur prune out dead branches and increase tree vigor.
Several fungi also cause leaf spots which, when
severe, can cause defoliation.