Fact Sheet ST-97
November 1993
Betula pendula
Figure 1. Middle-aged European Birch.
European Birch1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
European birch is graceful and ornamental with
wonderful yellow fall color but is susceptible to fatal
attacks of bronze birch borer (Fig. 1). The leaves are
often browned by birch leaf miner. When grown, plan
to provide the necessary insect control and provide the
necessary cultural conditions for best growth.
European birch grows rapidly, reaching a height of 35
to 75 feet. Lawn grasses grow well in its light shade.
A moist soil and a regular fertilization program plus
watering in dry weather are suggested. Although
popular, the tree requires more care and spraying than
other ornamental trees. Not a low maintenance tree.
Maintaining a good mulch around the root zone is
helpful.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Betula pendula
Pronunciation: BET-yoo-luh PEND-yoo-luh
Common name(s): European Birch
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 6 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: near a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal; weeping
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-97, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Betula pendula -- European Birch Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: ovate; rhomboid
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; should be grown with a
single leader; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Betula pendula -- European Birch Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of European Birch.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Several cultivars are available but these too will
have pest problems: ‘Dalecarlica’ - deeply lobed leaves
on pendulous branches; ‘Laciniata’ - cut leaves;
‘Fastigiata’- upright growth habit; ‘Purple
Splendor’(purpurea), ‘Scarlet Glory’ - purple leaves;
‘Tristis’ - weeping habit; ‘Youngii’- weeping habit.
Pests
A light aphid infestation may not be serious but
heavy infestations cause distorted and stunted growth
and produce large amounts of honeydew. The
honeydew serves as a substrate for sooty mold.
Birch skeletonizer feeding causes leaf browning.
The skeletonizer larva is yellowish-green and one
quarter-inch-long.
Birch leaf miner is a common insect pest of birch.
A small white worm eats out the middle of the leaf
which turns brown. Severe attacks of birch leaf miner
predispose trees to bronze birch borer infestation. The
insect shows up in mid May but timing can vary from
one year to the next, and will vary according to your
location in the country. The first of two generations
per year is the most damaging.
The most serious pest of landscape birches is
bronze birch borer. Stressed trees are most susceptible
to borer attacks. The insect bores in the sapwood,
beginning in the top third of the tree, causing death of
the tree crown. The tunnels are slightly raised and
faintly rust colored. Emergence holes in the trunk are
shaped like capital D’s. Keep the trees healthy by
controlling other insects, fertilizing, and watering as
needed. Chemical control is applied to the trunk and
main branches. Timing of the first spray will vary
from year to year depending on weather conditions. A
commercial sprayer may be needed to apply the spray
adequately.
Diseases
Several fungi cause canker diseases on birch.
These diseases infect and kill sapwood causing sunken
areas on the trunk and larger branches. There is no
chemical control for canker diseases. Preventive
measures include keeping the tree healthy and
avoiding wounding. Regular fertilization will keep
birches vigorous and more resistant to cankers. Water
in dry weather to prevent water stress.
Dieback is characterized by a slow death of the
branches. The tree crown accumulates dead branches.
Injury caused by bronze birch borer is similar but far
more prevalent. Prevent dieback by maintaining tree
vigor with water and fertilizer. When the disease does
occur prune out dead branches and increase tree vigor.
Several fungi also cause leaf spots which, when
severe, can cause defoliation.