Fact Sheet ST-94
November 1993
Betula nigra
Figure 1. Young River Birch.
River Birch1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
River birch can grow 50 to 90 feet tall but is often
seen 40 to 50 feet (Fig. 1). It normally grows with a
central leader and small-diameter, dark-colored lateral
branches. It has a narrow, oval to pyramidal crown
when young, spreading wider with age as several
branches become dominant. It lacks the white trunk
bark associated with other birches but is distinguished
by reddish, brown bark peeling off in film-like papery
curls providing interest all year round. River birch can
be easily trained with one central leader or as a multistemmed tree. Some nurseries plant two or three trees
together to form a clump, but these trunks will not
fuse into one strong trunk. Should be grown more as
a single-trunked specimen. Branches droop
particularly when they are wet, so regular pruning in
the early years will be required to remove lower
branches when they are located close to areas where
clearance is needed for vehicular traffic.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Betula nigra
Pronunciation: BET-yoo-luh NYE-gruh
Common name(s): River Birch
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; near a deck or patio; screen; shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal; upright
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-94, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Betula nigra -- River Birch Page 2
Crown density: dense
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: ovate; rhomboid
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; tree wants
to grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Betula nigra -- River Birch Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of River Birch.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It is very well-suited for planting along steam
banks where it is native and in other areas which are
inundated for weeks. River birch tolerates low soil
oxygen, flooding, and clay soil but needs moist
conditions. The tree requires an acid soil, otherwise it
becomes chlorotic. River birch is hardy, grows
rapidly, but tends to be short-lived (30 to 40 years) in
many urban settings, possibly due to inadequate water
supply. Situate the tree so it receives adequate water.
Large trees are prone to trunk decay. Not a tree to
plant and forget due to irrigation requirement.
The tree is not as susceptible to bronze birch borer
as are other birches. It is not particularly adapted to
heat but can make a nice tree in USDA hardiness zone
8b, possibly 9a, if provided with irrigation and plenty
of soil space. Not for confined street tree pits or tree
lawns in the south. The yellow fall color display is of
short duration.
The cultivar ‘Heritage’ grows 50 feet tall, has an
oval shape, and scaly bark that is beige in color and is
the closest to a paper white birch that will survive in
hot areas; it grows from Minnesota to Florida. It is
also tolerant of poor drainage. It is reportedly resistant
to bronze birch borer and unlike most birches it is
resistant to leaf spot. It is more vigorous than the
species.
Pests
No pests are of major concern. Resistant to
bronze birch borer.
Diseases
Leaf spots; chlorosis on soils with a high pH.