Fact Sheet ST-99
November 1993
Betula populifolia
Figure 1. Young Gray Birch.
Gray Birch1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A small, North American native tree, gray birch
reaches 20 to 30 feet in height with a 10 to 20-foot
spread, often forming loose, open thickets in the wild
but easily trained to a single, slender trunk with an
irregular, upright, pyramidal silhouette (Fig. 1). The
glossy, dark green leaves on reddish-brown twigs are
triangular-shaped, 2.5 to 3.5 inches long, and turn a
lovely yellow color in autumn before dropping. Both
male and female catkins, or blooms, appear on the
same tree, eventually producing a small cylindrical
cone, with the male catkins persisting on the trees well
into the winter. For the first four or five years, the
bark of gray birch is dark brown but later takes on a
smooth, chalky-white appearance but does not peel as
readily as the bark of white birches.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Betula populifolia
Pronunciation: BET-yoo-luh
pop-yoo-lih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Gray Birch
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 6 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; reclamation
plant; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 10 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal; upright
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-99, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Betula populifolia -- Gray Birch Page 2
Crown density: open
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem; persistent
on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Betula populifolia -- Gray Birch Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Gray Birch.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
With the attractive bark, persistent catkins, and
interesting, finely-branched silhouette, gray birch
makes a striking winter landscape planting, especially
against a backdrop of dark green evergreens. Gray
birch exhibits medium to fast growth (two feet per
year) and is relatively short-lived, approximately 20
years. It could be used as specimen tree where a small
to medium-sized fine-textured, upright plant is needed.
Gray birch will grow easily in full sun or partial
shade on almost any soil, tolerating the poorest, driest
soils to wet, streamside locations. It is an early
colonizer of recently-disturbed sites growing best alone
with little competition from other vegetation, and often
forms pure stands in nature from seedlings and root
suckers. It may suffer if interplanted with other
competing shrubs and ground covers. Trees will show
symptoms of chlorosis when grown on soil with a high
pH. Any necessary pruning should be done in summer
or fall since trees pruned in late winter or early spring
will bleed excessively.
Cultivars include: ‘Laciniata’, with pinnatelylobed leaves; ‘Pendula’, with drooping branches; and
‘Purpurea’, with purple young leaves.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
None of major concern but occasionally bothered
by leaf miners and cankers. Gray birch is quite
resistant to bronze birch borer.