Fact Sheet ST-101
November 1993
Bismarckia nobilis
Figure 1. Young Bismarck Palm.
Bismarck Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Lending a tropical flair to the landscape, Bismarck
Palm slowly reaches 25 to 50 feet or more in height
and is topped with gorgeous, four-foot-long and wide,
stiff, waxy, blue/gray leaves (Fig. 1). These palms
cannot be missed in the landscape due to the very
striking frond color and texture. The flower stalks are
four feet long and produce many 1.5-inch-long fruits.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Bismarckia nobilis
Pronunciation: biz-MAR-kee-uh no-BILL-iss
Common name(s): Bismarck Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: suitable for growing indoors; recommended for
buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; specimen
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 70 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: >36 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-101, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Bismarckia nobilis -- Bismarck Palm Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Several of these palms placed together in a
commercial or large residential setting can contrast
dramatically with existing vegetation, providing a
Bismarckia nobilis -- Bismarck Palm Page 3
wonderful relief from the greens so common in most
Figure 3. Foliage of Bismarck Palm.
landscapes. Single specimens are also attractive and
well suited for most residential-sized landscapes. A
row of Bismarck Palms spaced 15 feet apart along
each side of an entry road or wide walkway can create
a dramatic impact. Even if you do not collect palms,
this one should be considered when planning a
landscape in USDA hardiness zones 10 and 11.
Bismarck Palm should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained soil. This palm is highly
drought- and salt-tolerant and is becoming more
popular. As is the case with a number of palms, it
cannot be transplanted until a trunk develops and is
visible at the base of the plant.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
There are no major pest problems on this palm.
Watch for scale infestations.