Fact Sheet ST-103
November 1993
Bumelia lanuginosa
Figure 1. Mature Chittamwood.
Chittamwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American deciduous tree grows
40 to 50 feet in height and has an open canopy (Fig.
1). Because there appear to be many forms of the
plant in nature from shrubby to tree form, nursery
operators could make superior selections. The bark
varies considerably from tree to tree making this a
potential selection criteria for cultivar development.
The leathery, shiny green leaves are smooth on their
upperside and a fuzzy, red/brown to gray beneath.
They drop in late fall without a show. Small, fragrant
white flowers appear from June to July and are
followed in fall by large, shiny, blue/black, fleshy
fruits which are extremely popular with birds and other
wildlife. While the fruits are edible to man, they have
been known to produce unpleasant side-effects if eaten
in quantity.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Bumelia lanuginosa
Pronunciation: bew-MEEL-ee-uh
luh-noo-jih-NO-suh
Common name(s): Chittamwood, Gum Bumelia,
Gum Elastic Buckthorn
Family: Sapotaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen; residential
street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong; oblanceolate; obovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-103, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Bumelia lanuginosa -- Chittamwood Page 2
Leaf venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; thorns are present on the trunk or
branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Bumelia lanuginosa -- Chittamwood Page 3
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Figure 3. Foliage of Chittamwood.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Young trees require training to display a tree-like
form since a shrubby, rounded ball of foliage often
develops without pruning. It is well suited for a
reclamation site due to the adaptability to a wide range
of soil types. It could be planted in urban and
suburban landscapes, especially in areas that receive
minimum maintenance.
The common names of Gum Bumelia and GumElastic are derived from the sap which quickly oozes
from cuts or cracks to the bark. Youngsters in pioneer
days were known to chew this sap as a gum.
Chittamwood should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained soils. Trees found on
poor soils in the wild grow slowly and are stunted, but
with normal care they will grow well in a variety of
landscapes.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
It is pest free.