Fact Sheet ST-104
November 1993
Bursera simaruba
Figure 1. Mature Gumbo-Limbo.
Gumbo-Limbo1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large semievergreen tree, with an open,
irregular to rounded crown, may reach 60 feet in
height with an equal or wider spread but is usually
seen smaller (25 to 40 feet tall and 25 to 30 feet wide)
in landscape plantings (Fig. 1). The trunk and
branches are thick and are covered with resinous,
smooth, peeling coppery bark with an attractive, shiny,
freshly-varnished appearance. The tree typically
develops from two to four, large-diameter limbs
originating close to the ground. A native of south
Florida and the tropical offshore islands, the soft, lightweight and easily carved wood of gumbo-limbo was
used for making carousel horses before the advent of
molded plastics.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Bursera simaruba
Pronunciation: ber-SER-uh sim-uh-ROO-buh
Common name(s): Gumbo-Limbo
Family: Burseraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; shade tree; specimen; residential street tree;
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-104, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Bursera simaruba -- Gumbo-Limbo Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: semievergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; very showy
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Bursera simaruba -- Gumbo-Limbo Page 3
Drought tolerance: high
Figure 3. Foliage of Gumbo-Limbo.
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although growth rate is rapid and wood is soft,
gumbo-limbo trees have great resistance to strong
winds, drought, and neglect. Drought avoidance is
accomplished by leaf drop and growth is often best in
drier locations not receiving irrigation. The
inconspicuous flowers are followed by red, three-sided
berries which split into three sections at maturity to
reveal a 1/4-inch triangular red seed. The fruit takes a
year to ripen and matures in early summer.
Gumbo-limbo grows in full sun or partial shade on
a wide range of well-drained soils. Tolerant of
moderate amounts of salt spray, gumbo-limbo adapts
to alkaline or poor, deep white sands but will also
grow quickly on more fertile soil. Once established,
gumbo-limbo requires little attention other than
occasional pruning to remove lower branches which
may droop close to the ground.
Gumbo-limbo is ideal for a freestanding specimen
on a large property or as a street tree but does need
room to grow. Lower branches will grow close to the
ground, so street trees will have to be trained early for
proper development. Locate the lowest permanent
branch about 15 feet off the ground to provide enough
clearance for a street tree planting. Specimen trees are
often grown with branches beginning much closer to
the ground, providing a beautiful specimen plant with
wonderful bark.
Propagation is by seed which germinates readily if
fresh but, most often, gumbo-limbo is propagated by
cuttings of any size twig or branch. Huge truncheons
(up to 12 inches in diameter) are planted in the ground
where they sprout and grow into a tree. Be sure to
properly prune and train a tree grown in this fashion,
since many sprouts often develop along the trunk after
planting. A tree left to grow in this manner usually
develops weak branches which may fall from the tree
as it grows older. Space major branches out along the
main trunk to create a strong tree. It is probably best
to plant seed-grown trees or those propagated from
smaller, more traditionally-sized cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Occasionally caterpillars will chew the leaves, but
rarely damage enough to warrant control.