Fact Sheet ST-106
November 1993
Caesalpinia granadillo
Figure 1. Middle-aged Bridalveil Tree.
Bridalveil Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Bridalveil Tree makes a wonderful shade tree, the
35-foot-high tree clothed with finely textured,
pinnately compound, evergreen leaves (Fig. 1). In
summer and fall, Bridalveil Tree is decorated with
showy yellow blossoms. The bark is also quite
striking, peeling off in thin strips showing an unusual
green and grey mottling. The tree is usually found
growing with several trunks originating from the lower
four feet of the tree. This feature, along with the
unusual bark traits, make this a highly desirable tree
for planting in almost any landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Caesalpinia granadillo
Pronunciation: sez-al-PIN-ee-uh gran-uh-DILL-oh
Common name(s): Bridalveil Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking
lot islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; trainable as a standard; shade tree;
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-106, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Caesalpinia granadillo -- Bridalveil Tree Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: bipinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to
grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Caesalpinia granadillo -- Bridalveil Tree Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Not commonly available in nurseries, Bridalveil
Tree may increase in popularity once people discover
its outstanding characteristics. The fine-textured
foliage combines with an upright-vase shape to form a
canopy tree with few equals. It is well suited for a
residence, staying small enough to keep it from
overtaking a property. It can be planted on 25 foot
centers along a road, or placed in a parking lot buffer
strip to create a nice canopy of soft foliage.
Bridalveil Tree should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil. The tree is moderately droughttolerant. Early pruning is needed to prevent bark from
pinching or becoming embedded in the crotches.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.