Fact Sheet ST-107
November 1993
Caesalpinia pulcherrima
Figure 1. Middle-aged Dwarf Poinciana.
Dwarf Poinciana1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Brilliant scarlet and yellow flowers, feathery
foliage, and quick growth make Dwarf Poinciana a
popular evergreen shrub (Fig. 1). It is hard to find a
more attractive flower. Also known as Barbados
Flower-Fence, this open-branched, fine-textured shrub
will tolerate hot, dry areas, and forms an effective
thorny barrier. It flowers year-round with peak
displays in spring and fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Caesalpinia pulcherrima
Pronunciation: sez-al-PIN-ee-uh pul-KAIR-ih-muh
Common name(s): Dwarf Poinciana, Barbados
Flowerfence
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 8 to 12 feet
Spread: 10 to 12 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; even pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: orange; red; yellow
Flower characteristics: very showy; year round
flowering
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-107, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Caesalpinia pulcherrima -- Dwarf Poinciana Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Full sun is preferred for best flowering but some
shade is tolerated. Any soil is suitable as long as it is
well-drained. Dwarf Poinciana is perfectly suited to
informal plantings. This is a beautiful, refreshing
Caesalpinia pulcherrima -- Dwarf Poinciana Page 3
addition to any garden or yard as a specimen or as an
Figure 3. Foliage of Dwarf Poinciana.
accent toward the middle or back of a shrub border.
Tipping the branches during the growing season
creates a fuller shrub and more flowers. With some
training and pruning, you can create a small, 12 to 15-
foot-tall multistemmed tree, but the natural form is a
low branched, full, widespreading shrub about 10 feet
tall and wide. Allow plenty of room for this plant to
develop as a shrub.
Propagation is by seed which germinate faster if
scarified or soaked in hot water.
Pests
Scale will present an occasional problem.
Diseases
Dwarf Poinciana is susceptible to mushroom root
rot, especially in poorly-drained soil.