Fact Sheet ST-110
November 1993
Callistemon citrinus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Red Bottlebrush.
Red Bottlebrush1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The common name, "bottlebrush", perfectly
describes this evergreen plant’s bright red flower
spikes (Fig. 1). Hummingbirds love the flowers, and
the plant is hardier than most Bottlebrushes. The
flowers are followed by small, woody capsules that
look like bead bracelets on the bark, and which last for
years. Offered as a shrub, Bottlebrush can be trained
as a tree to 15 feet or espaliered as a quick wall cover.
It makes a nice screen or tall unclipped hedge.
Pruning to develop several trunks and removing some
lower branches can create a fine small specimen tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Callistemon citrinus
Pronunciation: kal-liss-STEE-mawn sih-TRY-nus
Common name(s): Red Bottlebrush, Lemon
Bottlebrush
Family: Myrtaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; screen; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-110, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Callistemon citrinus -- Red Bottlebrush Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Callistemon citrinus -- Red Bottlebrush Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Red Bottlebrush.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
A good choice for a spot offering full sun, it will
adapt to a variety of soils. Very drought-tolerant once
established, Bottlebrush tolerates any soil except very
poor, alkaline, or poorly-drained. Fertilize regularly to
maintain good flower color and dark green foliage.
Suckers from the trunk need to be removed
periodically to maintain tree form.
Propagation is usually from cuttings as it is
variable when grown from seed.
Pests
No particular insect pests are listed for
Callistemon.
Diseases
If the soil is too moist, root and crown-attacking
fungus diseases can be a problem. Prevention is your
best hope--keep the plant on the dry side with low
fertility and good air circulation.
A twig gall, formed in response to a fungus
(Sphaeropsis tumefacens), can disfigure the tree.
Chlorosis, a systemic condition which causes new
leaves to turn yellow, can be corrected with treatment
of the soil using iron sulfate or iron chelate.