Fact Sheet ST-111
November 1993
Callistemon viminalis
Figure 1. Mature Weeping Bottlebrush.
Weeping Bottlebrush1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This popular evergreen tree has a dense,
multitrunked, low-branching, pendulous growth habit
and a moderate growth rate (Fig. 1). Mature
specimens can reach 25 to 30 feet tall in 30-years but
most trees are seen 15 to 20 feet high and wide. The
narrow, light green, three to four-inch-long leaves tend
to grow only at the ends of the long, hanging
branches, creating a weeping effect. The cylindrical,
bright scarlet blooms, three to five inches long and
one-inch wide, are composed of multiple, long,
bristlelike stamens. These blooms appear in great
abundance March through July, less so throughout the
year. The flowers are followed by persistent woody
capsules which are not noticed unless you are close to
the tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Callistemon viminalis
Pronunciation: kal-liss-STEE-mawn
vim-min-NAY-liss
Common name(s): Weeping Bottlebrush
Family: Myrtaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; screen; specimen;
residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; weeping
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-111, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Callistemon viminalis -- Weeping Bottlebrush Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy (Fig. 3)
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Callistemon viminalis -- Weeping Bottlebrush Page 3
Figure 3. Flower of Weeping Bottlebrush.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Weeping Bottlebrushes should be grown in full
sun, preferably on moist, well-drained soil. Although
they can tolerate some drought, best flowering and
growth is obtained with ample moisture and regular
fertilization. Be sure the soil drains well as roots often
rot in wet soil. The brittle wood of Weeping
Bottlebrush may make it unsuitable for windy areas
but this is usually not a problem in most locations.
They are not suitable for street tree planting due to the
weeping growth habit, but will make nice plantings
along streets in wide medians. Lower branches can be
removed so cars can fit beneath in parking lots where
they grow well in the restricted soil space. Occasional
pruning of pendulous branches will be required for
vehicle clearance. One of the best uses is for lawn
specimens, or screens on large properties, with a
regular maintenance program.
The cultivar ‘Red Cascade’ has large red flowers
in spring and fall. Callistemon citrinis and
Callistemon rigidus are hardy in the southern part of
USDA hardiness zone 8b.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings.
Pests
Mites and witches broom can be troublesome.
Diseases
Root rot in wet soil, and canker. A twig gall,
formed in response to a fungus (Sphaeropsis
tumefacens), can disfigure the tree. The tree is often
short-lived due to disease.