Fact Sheet ST-114
November 1993
Calophyllum brasiliense
Figure 1. Middle-aged Santa Maria.
Santa Maria1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This upright, bushy, medium to coarse-textured
evergreen tree is densely foliated with four-inch-long,
leathery leaves (Fig. 1). Although able to reach 50
feet in height in the forest, Santa Maria tends to be a
slow-growing, moderately-sized tree about 30 to 40
feet tall with a 40 to 50-foot spread. It is well-suited
for planting beneath power lines 40 feet high. Small,
white, fragrant flowers appear on one to two-inch-long
racemes among the four to six-inch-long, glossy
leaves. Well-suited as a street, parking lot, patio or
small shade tree, especially for coastal areas, Santa
Maria can also be used as a screen, and can be
maintained as a shrub. The stems bleed a yellow latex
when injured and the wood of the Santa Maria tree is
valuable for ship building and cabinet work. The bark
is almost black and is longitudinally furrowed and
quite attractive.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Calophyllum brasiliense
Pronunciation: kal-oh-FILL-um bruh-sill-ee-EN-see
Common name(s): Santa Maria
Family: Clusiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; shade tree;
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-114, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Calophyllum brasiliense -- Santa Maria Page 2
Crown shape: oval; round; pyramidal
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Calophyllum brasiliense -- Santa Maria Page 3
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
Figure 3. Foliage of Santa Maria.
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Santa Maria should be planted in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained soil. It has good salt
tolerance and is often seen along the beach. Grows
well in confined soil spaces, such as along a street,
and the tree should be propagated, sold and planted in
urban areas much more often. Remember that the
golfball-sized fruit is poisonous and hard, and this
could be undesirable in the landscape under some
circumstances. The trunk grows to about two feet in
diameter.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.