Fact Sheet ST-113
November 1993
Calocedrus decurrens
Figure 1. Middle-aged California Incense-Cedar.
California Incense-Cedar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This stately native evergreen tree slowly grows
straight up in a very narrow cone or columnar shape to
a height of 70 to 100 feet or more in the wild, 40 to
60 feet in landscapes, yet is only 8 to 12 feet wide at
maturity (Fig. 1). The branches, which are densely
clothed with flat, shiny, dark green, aromatic needles,
extend to the ground and remain on the tree unless
shaded-out by other trees, making California IncenseCedar ideal for use as a screen, hedge, or windbreak.
Small, one-inch-long cones are produced at branch tips
and are quite persistent, the seeds providing a welcome
treat for many varieties of birds and wildlife.
Although growth is slow, California Incense-Cedar
trees are extremely long-lived, surviving 500 to 1000
years in the wild. Mature specimens have attractive,
brick red, flaky, furrowed bark.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Calocedrus decurrens
Pronunciation: kal-oh-SEE-drus deck-ER-renz
Common name(s): California Incense-Cedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; screen; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 8 to 12 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-113, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Calocedrus decurrens -- California Incense-Cedar Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; should be grown with a single leader; very
showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.37
Calocedrus decurrens -- California Incense-Cedar Page 3
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
California Incense-Cedar is a bit particular as to its
growing requirements, being very sensitive to
continually wet conditions. But with the right
combination of proper humidity and moist soil,
California Incense-Cedar will be quite happy growing
in full sun or partial shade with some protection from
harsh winds. It is surprisingly tolerant of heat and
drought. Pruning is rarely necessary but trees may be
sheared, if desired, to maintain a shorter, denser
screen. Beautiful specimens of this tree can be seen
growing in USDA hardiness zones six and 7.
Many plants grown seem to be the cultivar
‘Columnaris’, having a very formal landscape effect.
The cultivar ‘Compacta’ has a dwarf, compact growth
habit; ‘Aureovariegata’ has interspersed sprays of
bright yellow foliage.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings (with great
difficulty) or grafted onto Thuja occidentalis.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
A serious problem is heart rot, less serious
problems are rust and leafy mistletoe.