Fact Sheet ST-118
November 1993
Carpinus betulus
Figure 1. Middle-aged European Hornbeam.
European Hornbeam1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The species is not normally grown but it reaches
60 feet tall and spreads 40 feet preferring well-drained
soil (Fig. 1). Cultivars are more common than the
species. The cultivar ‘Fastigiata’ is most often offered
by nurseries and is a popular street tree. The species
tolerates a pH above 7.0. The plant grows slowly, is
shallow rooted, and it can branch low to the ground.
The crown is finely branched, densely foliated and
forms a beautiful oval or vase in the landscape.
European hornbeam has yellow fall color and enough
pruning tolerance to be a hedge, tall screen or topiary.
It was and is the plant of choice for clipped screens
and hedges in English and early American gardens.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Carpinus betulus
Pronunciation: kar-PYE-nus BET-yoo-lus
Common name(s): European Hornbeam
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200
square feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; screen;
shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet
in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-118, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Carpinus betulus -- European Hornbeam Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem; persistent
on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Carpinus betulus -- European Hornbeam Page 3
Breakage: resistant
Figure 3. Foliage of European Hornbeam.
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree lends itself well for use as a screen due
to the densely foliated crown and low, dense
branching. It can also be trained to one central leader
and used as a fine street tree, but will benefit from
occasional irrigation in a prolonged drought, although
severe drought will not kill the tree, but could cause
die-back. There are old plants in the south which look
great, having received no irrigation in recent droughts.
These plants were observed in areas where soil space
was not limiting and roots were allowed to expand
unhindered by urban structures like curbs, pavement
and sidewalks.
Lower branches should be removed early if using
it for a street tree but with lower branches intact it
makes a wonderful climbing tree. The cultivars are
usually very branchy and form a dense crown too thick
to climb. The wood is very hard and strong and dulls
wood working tools quickly. Fruit and buds are eaten
by many birds.
It is reportedly difficult to transplant which, along
with slow growth, probably accounts for its lack of
use. Transplant from the field in the spring. But it
has most of the attributes commonly associated with a
good urban tree and should be planted more.
There are a number of useful cultivars of
European Hornbeam but they may be hard to find,
except ‘Fastigiata’: ‘Asplenifolia’ - deeply lobed
leaves; ‘Columnaris’ - narrow, dense growth habit,
similar to and often confused with ‘Fastigiata’;
‘Fastigiata’ - is generally available, 30 to 40 feet tall,
dense, upright when young but spreading somewhat
with age, can be used as an unpruned screen due to its
resistance to wind, also very useful as a street tree,
fine branches; ‘Globosa’ - rounded growth habit;
‘Horizontalis’ - flat topped; ‘Incisa’ - leaves deeply
toothed, small leaves; ‘Pendula’ - weeping habit;
‘Purpurea’ - young leaves purplish; ‘Pyramidalis’ -
upright.
Pests
Relatively few insects attack European hornbeam.
Maple phenacoccus forms white cottony masses on the
undersides of the leaves. Two-lined chestnut borer can
cause dieback.
Diseases
None are normally very serious. Several fungi
cause leaf spots on Hornbeam. Leaf spots are not
serious so control measures are usually not needed.
Canker caused by several fungi causes infected
branches to dieback and entire trees die if the trunk is
infected and girdled. Severely infected trees cannot be
saved but infected branches are pruned out.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery growth
on the leaves. The disease is not common on
Carpinus.