Fact Sheet ST-123
November 1993
Carya ovata
Figure 1. Mature Shagbark Hickory.
Shagbark Hickory1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Shagbark Hickory reaches a height of 60 to 80
feet and spreads 25 to 35 feet (Fig. 1). The tree has a
picturesque, oval outline with the lower branches
somewhat drooping, the upper branches upright, and
the middle branches just about horizontal. Probably
the best ornamental hickory due to the open branching
habit and shaggy, gray bark.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Carya ovata
Pronunciation: KAIR-ee-uh oh-VAY-tuh
Common name(s): Shagbark Hickory
Family: Juglandaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: shade tree; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; oblong; oblanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-123, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Carya ovata -- Shagbark Hickory Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.72
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Carya ovata -- Shagbark Hickory Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Shagbark Hickory.
Growth rate is slow and the tree is somewhat
difficult to transplant due to a coarse root system but
the tree is adaptable to many different soils. There is
usually a tap root on trees grown in well-drained soil.
The nuts are produced in abundance and are edible
and used by birds and mammals but must also be
cleaned up from the ground in a maintained landscape.
They can damage cars when they fall from the tree, so
do not locate them near streets or parking areas.
Shagbark Hickory grows best in a sunny location and
light well-drained soil. It grows naturally in moist
river bottoms, not inundated flood plains,
The tree has two ornamental characteristics:
peeling, shaggy bark, which peels off in long strips,
and a golden yellow fall color. The light grey bark is
quite striking. Not a tree for general use, Shagbark
Hickory is best saved for an occasional specimen on
golf courses and parks and in other open areas.
Pests
Aphids of various types feed on hickory causing
distorted and stunted growth. The hickory leaf stem
gall causes the formation of hollow green galls on
leaves, stems, and twigs. The galls form in June and
turn black in July. The galls are up to a half inch in
diameter.
Hickory bark beetles mine the bark and sapwood.
The boring causes wilting of young twigs, or trunks
may be girdled and trees killed. Keep trees healthy by
fertilizing regularly and by watering during dry
weather. It can kill trees of low vigor.
The twig girdler larva girdles twigs causing
weakened twigs to break off and drop. The larva is
about a half-inch-long and rides the branch to the
ground where it overwinters. Gather the fallen twigs
and destroy them.
June beetles eat the leaves of hickory at night.
The injury is usually not severe but can be mysterious
since no insects are seen during the day.
Caterpillars of various types feed on hickory.
Scales of various types attack hickory but can be
controlled with sprays of horticultural oil.
Spittlebugs can be a nuisance.
Diseases
Hickory anthracnose or leaf spot is caused by a
fungus. In wet years the disease causes severe
defoliation. The symptoms are large reddish brown
spots on the upper leaf surface but brown on the lower
surface. The spots may not have distinct marginal
markings. The disease overwinters on fallen diseased
leaves so dispose of infected leaves in the fall. A
large number of fungi cause leaf spots on hickory.
Severe infections can cause defoliation. Many of the
fungi overwinter on diseased leaves, dispose of
infected leaves when they fall.
Witches broom can follow a leaf spot disease.
Symptoms are yellow blotches on the upper sides of
the leaves but white on the undersides. Severe
infections may cause defoliation, and when the fungus
invades the stem a witches broom forms. Leaves on
the stems of the witches broom are yellowish, small,
and fall prematurely. Prune out witches brooms when
they form.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery growth
on the leaves. If the disease occurs late in the season,
no chemical control will be needed.
Try to prevent cankers by keeping trees healthy
through watering during dry weather and regular
fertilization. Avoid wounding the trees unnecessarily
and prune out weak or dead branches.
Verticillium wilt kills individual branches or
sometimes entire sections of the tree. Foliage on
affected branches wilts and later turns brown. Keep
trees healthy and prune out small infected branches.