Fact Sheet ST-120
November 1993
Carpinus caroliniana
Figure 1. Young American Hornbeam.
American Hornbeam1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A handsome tree in many locations, the tree
slowly reaches a height and spread of 20 to 30 feet
(Fig. 1). It will grow with an attractive open habit in
total shade, but be dense in full sun. The muscle-like
bark is smooth, gray and fluted. Ironwood has a slow
growth rate and is reportedly difficult to transplant
from a field nursery (although 10-inch-diameter trees
were moved with a 90-inch tree spade during the
winter in USDA hardiness zone 8b with no problem)
but is easy from containers. The fall color is faintly
orange to yellow and stands out in the landscape or
woods in the fall. Brown leaves occasionally hang on
the tree into the winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Carpinus caroliniana
Pronunciation: kar-PYE-nus kair-oh-lin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): American Hornbeam, Blue-Beech,
Ironwood
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); near a deck
or patio; screen; shade tree; specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-120, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Carpinus caroliniana -- American Hornbeam Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: orange; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Carpinus caroliniana -- American Hornbeam Page 3
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of American Hornbeam.
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
With age, a multiple trunked, low branching
specimen can be very attractive, showing off the bark
and trunk form particularly well when lit at night.
Tolerant of pruning, the tree can be used as a hedge
plant or lends itself well for use as a screen due to the
densely foliated crown. It can also be trained for street
tree use by pruning to one central leader with smalldiameter horizontal branches forming ‘layers’ of
foliage in the crown. Some nurseries offer singlestemmed specimens. Well-suited for small spaces in
the shade or sun, ironwood is tolerant of occasional
flooding. The wood is very hard and strong and
makes a great tree for climbing if allowed to grow
with low branches intact. The wood dulls wood
working tools quickly. Nutlets and buds are eaten by
many birds and squirrels. If transplanting from the
field, do it in the spring.
It performs well even in areas inundated with
water for several days to a week or two once it is
established. Although moderately drought-tolerant, it
is probably best to provide even established trees with
some irrigation during dry spells in the south.
Ironwood grows in sun or shade (as an understory tree
in the woods) and tolerates most soils, including wet,
but not alkaline.
Pests
Relatively few insects attack hornbeam. Maple
phenacoccus forms white cottony masses on the
undersides of the leaves.
Diseases
None are normally very serious. Several fungi
cause leaf spots on Carpinus. Leaf spots are not
serious so control measures are usually not needed.
Canker, caused by several fungi, causes infected
branches to dieback and entire trees die if the trunk is
infected and girdled. Severely infected trees can not
be saved and infected branches are pruned out. This
could limit usefulness in parts of the Deep South.