Fact Sheet ST-122
November 1993
Carya illinoensis
Figure 1. Young Pecan.
Pecan1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The state tree of Texas, this tree needs plenty of
room (above and below ground) to grow (Fig. 1).
Pecan trees can reach up to 130 feet in height but will
usually grow 70 to 100 feet tall with a spread of 40 to
75 feet. The largest of the hickories, this deciduous
American native tree has a uniform, symmetrical,
broadly oval crown and is massively-branched. Large
major limbs grow up and out from the trunk in a
distinctive upright, spreading fashion. On older trees,
lower branches become wide-sweeping, with their tips
almost touching the ground. Trunks can grow to six
feet in diameter. The wood is used for flooring,
cabinets, and furniture. The native sweet Pecan makes
a good urban shade tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Carya illinoensis
Pronunciation: KAIR-ee-uh ill-lin-no-EN-sis
Common name(s): Pecan
Family: Juglandaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: fruit tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 70 to 100 feet
Spread: 50 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-122, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Carya illinoensis -- Pecan Page 2
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.66
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Carya illinoensis -- Pecan Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Pecan.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Pecan trees are well-suited to large landscapes and
natural settings where wildlife is greatly attracted by
the fruit. Branches on the tree are sometimes rather
brittle, breaking toward the base. Be sure to space
major limbs along the trunk so they are not all
originating from the same point on the trunk as seen in
pecan groves. Prune to a central leader which can
usually be identified if the tree has not been topped.
This will add longevity and greater safety to the tree
since well-spaced limbs are better-attached to the tree
than those clustered together. Leaves sometimes drop
during the summer due to insects or disease,
stimulating the tree to initiate a new set of leaves in
late summer.
Growing well in full sun or part shade locations,
Pecan trees grow best on fertile, well-drained, acid or
alkaline moist soil, and are not salt-tolerant. They
grow, although more slowly, on droughty sandy soils
and often defoliate early without irrigation. Care must
be taken in locating this tree, not only due to its size
and fruit drop but because the leaves and pecan husks
release a substance which can stain clothes, pavements,
and cars during rains. The falling pecans can also
damage vehicles.
Numerous pest and disease problems make pecan
a high-maintenance plant which often requires
spraying in order to maintain a good-looking, clean
tree. Pecan is subject to sudden summer limb drop, a
phenomena characterized by branch failure in the
middle of a large-diameter branch. This typically
occurs on a very hot summer day with no wind. The
best treatment is preventive pruning to eliminate some
of the weight along major horizontal limbs. This
thinning type of pruning should only be performed by
a professional. Squirrels have also devastated trees in
New Orleans and other areas by stripping off the bark.
Many selections are available for nut quality,
disease resistance, and for specific regions. Be sure to
select a cultivar suitable for your particular area of the
country. Consult your county agricultural agent for
the latest recommendations. Be sure to train and
prune trees so branches are well-attached to the trunk
so the heavy nut production will not cause branch
failure. ‘Desirable’, ‘Stuart’, ‘Moreland’, ‘Elliot’, and
‘Curtis’ are among the most popular ones in Florida.
‘Desirable’, ‘Cheyenne’, ‘Choctaw’, ‘Cape Fear’,
‘Shawnee’, ‘Oconee’, and ‘Caddo’ are among those
recommended in Texas. ‘Cheyenne’ has a semi-dwarf
spreading form and medium to large fruit.
‘Chickasaw’ has a fine-textured, spreading form,
disease resistance, and medium to large fruit. ‘Elliot’
has an upright habit of growth with fine texture,
disease resistance, and small fruit. ‘Owens’ has
compact growth and medium to large fruit.
‘Shoshonii’ has upright growth habit, strong branches,
disease resistance, and large fruit. ‘Stuart’ has a vaseshaped form, is an old selection widely planted, with
Carya illinoensis -- Pecan Page 4
large fruit but is weak-wooded. ‘Melrose’, ‘Candy’,
‘Elliot’, and ‘Sumner’ have increased scab resistance.
Propagation is by budding or grafting.
Pests
Aphids of various types feed on Pecan causing
distorted and stunted growth. The hickory leaf stem
gall phylloxera causes the formation of hollow green
galls on leaves, stems, and twigs. The galls form in
early summer turn black in mid-summer. The galls are
up to a half inch in diameter. Trees are often
defoliated by aphids and sooty mold in mid-summer
and put out a second flush of leaves in late summer.
Hickory bark beetles mine the bark and sapwood.
The boring cause wilting of young twigs or trunks may
be girdled and trees killed. Keep trees healthy by
fertilizing regularly and by watering during dry
weather.
The twig girdler larva girdles twigs causing
weakened twigs to break off and drop. The larva is
about a half-inch-long and rides the branch to the
ground where it overwinters. Gather the fallen twigs
and destroy them.
June beetles eat the leaves of Pecan at night. The
injury is usually not severe but can be mysterious
since no insects are seen during the day.
Caterpillars (including tent and fall webworm) of
various types feed on Pecan.
Scales of various types attack Pecan but can be
controlled with sprays of horticultural oil.
Spittlebugs can be a nuisance on Carya.
Pecan weevil.
Diseases
Pecan trees are very susceptible to scab. It is best
to plant only those cultivars resistant to this disease.
Hickory anthracnose or leaf spot is caused by a
fungus. In wet years the disease causes severe
defoliation. The symptoms are large reddish brown
spots on the upper leaf surface but brown on the lower
surface. The spots may not have distinct marginal
markings. The disease overwinters on fallen diseased
leaves so dispose of infected leaves in the fall.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots on
Pecan. Severe infections can cause defoliation. Many
of the fungi overwinter on diseased leaves, dispose of
infected leaves when they fall.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery growth
on the leaves. If the disease occurs late in the season,
no chemical control will be needed.
Try to prevent cankers by keeping trees healthy
through watering during dry weather and regular
fertilization. Avoid wounding the trees unnecessarily
and prune out weak or dead branches.
Verticillium wilt kills individual branches or
sometimes entire sections of the tree. Foliage on
affected branches wilts and later turns brown. Keep
trees healthy and prune out small infected branches.
Minor element deficiencies, especially zinc, are
evident on alkaline soils.