Fact Sheet ST-127
November 1993
Cassia fistula
Figure 1. Middle-aged Golden-Shower.
Golden-Shower1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Golden-Shower is a fast-growing tree which
reaches 30 to 40 feet in height and 30 to 40 feet wide
(Fig. 1). The well-spaced branches are clothed with
pinnately compound leaves, with leaflets up to eight
inches long and 2.5 inches wide. These leaves will
drop from the tree for a short period of time and are
quickly replaced by new leaves. In summer, GoldenShower is decorated with thick clusters of showy
yellow blooms which cover the slightly drooping
branches. The blooms are followed by the production
of two-foot-long, dark brown, cylindrical seedpods
which persist on the tree throughout the winter before
falling to litter the ground. The seeds contained within
are poisonous.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cassia fistula
Pronunciation: KASS-ee-uh FIST-yoo-luh
Common name(s): Golden-Shower
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; upright; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-127, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cassia fistula -- Golden-Shower Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire; undulate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 12 inches or more
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Cassia fistula -- Golden-Shower Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Golden-Shower.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Golden-Shower is ideal for use as a specimen
planting. It can look a bit coarse and unkempt for
short periods when the leaves drop but the vibrant
flower display more than makes up for this. Some
communities have planted this as a street tree where it
has held up quite well.
Golden-Shower should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil. The trees are moderately droughtand salt-tolerant. Although Golden-Shower is
damaged by temperatures falling slightly below
freezing, it will come back with warmer weather.
Trees will need occasionally pruning when they are
young to control shape and develop a uniform crown.
Young trees can grow asymmetrical with branches
often drooping toward the ground. Staking and proper
pruning will help develop a well shaped and structured
crown.
Propagation is by seeds (which are poisonous).
Pests
No pests are of major concern but occasionally
bothered by caterpillars.
Diseases
Mildew, leaf spot, root rot diseases.