Fact Sheet ST-126
November 1993
Cassia bicapsularis
Figure 1. Mature Butterfly Bush.
Butterfly Bush1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
While other trees are preparing for winter,
Butterfly Bush is just waking up (Fig. 1). This
sprawling, semi-evergreen shrub, reaching a height of
8 to 10 feet with an equal spread, produces blossoms
in fall that resemble golden butterflies. Bright yellow
flowers appear at a time of year when little else is in
bloom. This plant has a place in any sunny landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cassia bicapsularis
Pronunciation: KASS-ee-uh bye-kap-soo-LAIR-iss
Common name(s): Butterfly Bush
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 8 to 12 feet
Spread: 8 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: obovate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: semievergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; very showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-126, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cassia bicapsularis -- Butterfly Bush Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
When knocked down by frost, the stems should be
cut off at ground level and vigorous sprouts will
emerge in spring. Butterfly Bush benefits from
frequent pinching of the young shoot tips during the
growing season up to the beginning of September; this
encourages branching and increases the number of
Cassia bicapsularis -- Butterfly Bush Page 3
flowers. Appropriate training can produce a very
Figure 3. Foliage of Butterfly Bush.
small specimen tree which looks nice growing in a low
ground cover. Trees often fall over and will require
staking to hold them upright. For this reason, it is
easiest to place it in a shrub border among other
shrubs which will help hold it erect. Well worth the
effort to stake a specimen tree, if needed, since the
tree is simply stunning in flower.
Tolerant of many soil conditions, Butterfly Bush
needs full sun for best growth and flowering, and
needs little care once established. Plant it and forget
about it, except for occasional watering during
drought. A good plant for highway median or
roadside specimen or cluster planting.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests
Foliage and flower buds are often eaten by
caterpillars in the fall, but these can be easily picked
off by hand. Cassia is otherwise seldom plagued by
insect pests or diseases. Damaged or stressed cassia
can be infested with trunk borers.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.