Fact Sheet ST-128
November 1993
Castanea mollissima
Figure 1. Mature Chinese Chestnut.
Chinese Chestnut1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chinese Chestnut reaches a height and spread of
about 40 feet in a sunny, open exposure and a welldrained soil (Fig. 1). It usually branches close to the
ground making it a good candidate for a specimen or
as a tree to climb. The tree is hard to transplant,
perhaps due to a coarse root system. The chief
ornamental feature is yellowish white catkins, present
in early summer, and a coarse foliage. A very striking
tree. The odor given off by the flowers for a short
period may be considered offensive to some people.
The nuts are edible but not as sweet as the American
Chestnut. The soft, spiny nut could become a hazard
on sidewalks (pedestrians could roll on the fruit and
fall), so locate them accordingly. But it is also fun for
children to collect. In cold climates the growing season
may not be long enough for the nuts to mature.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Castanea mollissima
Pronunciation: kass-TAY-nee-uh maw-LISS-sim-uh
Common name(s): Chinese Chestnut
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: fruit tree; shade tree; specimen; residential
street tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban
areas where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted
soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 40 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-128, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Castanea mollissima -- Chinese Chestnut Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Castanea mollissima -- Chinese Chestnut Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Chestnut.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This is an urban-tough tree which may not be a
suitable tree for street or parking lot locations but it
can make a nice shade tree. Any advantages of using
this tree may be overshadowed by the potential disease
problems (although it is moderately resistant to
chestnut blight), so plant it in limited numbers. Makes
a nice tree to line entry roads or along walks to create
a low-canopy shade tree. The fruit attracts wildlife,
and could be used in natural areas or other non-traffic
situations, away from pedestrian traffic. This is a
novelty tree which should be planted occasionally
rather than a staple for urban planting.
Best growth is in full-day sun. Chinese Chestnut
is tolerant of some drought but prefers good soil which
is loose, not dry, and not too wet.
The following four cultivars have been selected for
their nut production: ‘Abundance’, ‘Meiling’,
‘Nanking’, and ‘Kuling’. Others include: ‘Estate-jap’ -
highly resistant to chestnut blight; ‘Sleeping Giant’ -
grows larger than species; ‘Kelsey’ - smaller tree with
good nut quality.
Diseases and Pests
Usually pest-free.
Blight of chestnut has virtually eliminated the
American Chestnut from the landscape, but Chinese
Chestnut is moderately resistant to the disease, not
immune. The disease caused cankers on the branches
then moved into the trunk killing the tree. There is no
chemical control for the disease. Most chestnuts now
grown are asiatic types and are resistant (but not
immune) to the disease caused by the chestnut blight
fungus.
Twig canker is a problem on asiatic chestnuts.
The symptoms are a brown discoloration on a twig.
The disease girdles the twig and moves down to a
larger branch. The leaves on the girdled branch wilt,
turn brown and die. The canker is obvious due to
Castanea mollissima -- Chinese Chestnut Page 4
callus formation at the canker margin. The disease
attacks seedlings, very old trees, or unhealthy trees of
any age. No chemical control is available. Prune out
diseased branches and prevent the disease by keeping
trees healthy.
Leaf spots caused by various fungi can be a
problem. These are not serious so no chemical
controls are listed. Clean up and dispose of diseased
leaves.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery growth
on the leaves.