Fact Sheet ST-129
November 1993
Casuarina spp.
Figure 1. Middle-aged Australian-Pine.
Australian-Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Long-favored for use in erosion control along
beaches, Australian-Pine Tree is now outlawed in
many parts of Florida due to its invasive nature, rapid
growth rate, and non-native status (Fig. 1). It is not a
true pine tree and is not related to the pines. A
straight, upright tree capable of reaching 70 to 90 feet
in height and possessing rough, fissured, dark gray
bark, Australian-Pine has what appear to be long, soft,
gray/green needles but these "needles" are actually
multi-jointed branchlets, the true leaves being rather
inconspicuous. These "needles" sway gently in the
breeze and give off a distinctive, soft whistle when
winds are particularly strong. The insignificant
flowers are followed by small, spiny cones, less than
one-inch-long.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Casuarina spp.
Pronunciation: kass-yoo-ar-EYE-nuh species
Common name(s): Australian-Pine, Casuarina
Family: Casuarinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: not recommended for planting
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 70 to 90 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-129, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Casuarina spp. -- Australian-Pine Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: whorled (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Casuarina spp. -- Australian-Pine Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Australian-Pine.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Highly salt- and drought-tolerant, Australian-Pine
was widely used in seaside landscapes as a windbreak,
screen, clipped hedge, and for topiary. Its ability to
withstand heat and other adverse conditions made
Australian-Pine a favorite for street tree or specimen
use also. It is not planted now due to the problems it
has created including the elimination of habitat for
native plants. Injured trees compartmentalize wounds
poorly and decay advances rapidly through the trunk.
Old trees which have been topped and abused often
become hazardous and they can fall over or drop large
limbs.
Growing in full sun or partial shade, AustralianPine will tolerate many adverse conditions, dry or wet
soil, heat or high winds. Trees are hardy to about 25-
degrees F. Vigorous sprouts often originate from the
roots of older trees knocked back by the cold.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Root rot.