Fact Sheet ST-130
November 1993
Catalpa spp.
Figure 1. Middle-aged Catalpa.
Catalpa1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Catalpa speciosa (Northern Catalpa) grows in a
loose oval, 50 feet tall in most urban locations, but
occasionally grows to 90 feet (Fig. 1). This coarse,
large leaved tree spreads 50 feet and tolerates hot, dry
weather, but leaves may scorch and some drop from
the tree in very dry summers. Catalpa bignonioides
(Southern Catalpa) is somewhat smaller reaching about
30 to 40 feet tall, leaves are arranged opposite or in
whorls (speciosa leaves are opposite) and it is native
and has some salt tolerance. A sunny exposure and a
well-drained, moist, rich soil are preferred for best
growth of Catalpa but they will tolerate a range of
soils from acid to calcareous. Both trees have a
coarse, very open growth habit forming an irregularlyshaped crown. Popular in older gardens and has a
moderately-long life (60 years or so), but trunks on
large trees often contain rot. Catalpas are very
adaptable and they are tough trees, having naturalized
in many parts of the south.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Catalpa spp.
Pronunciation: kuh-TAL-puh species
Common name(s): Catalpa
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; shade tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-130, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Catalpa spp. -- Catalpa Page 2
Texture: coarse
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 12 inches or more
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: stout
Catalpa spp. -- Catalpa Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Catalpa.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growth is rapid at first but slows down with age
as the crown begins to round out and the tree increases
in spread. The main ornamental feature is panicles of
white with yellow and purple markings produced in
spring and early summer, depending on the particular
tree. But leaves fall throughout the summer in USDA
hardiness zone 8 making a mess and the tree looks
ragged with yellow leaves in late summer. Flowers
make somewhat of a slimy mess for a short period
when they drop on a sidewalk but are no problem
falling into shrubs, groundcovers, or turf. The fruit is
a long pod (up to two feet long) resembling a string
bean that can be a slight litter problem to some, but it
is quite interesting. The tree is useful in areas where
quick growth is desired, but there are better, more
durable trees available for street and parking lot
plantings. Sixty-year-old trees in Williamsburg,
Virginia have three to four-foot-diameter trunks and
are 40 feet tall. Catalpa often escapes cultivation and
invades surrounding woodlands.
Catalpas are planted to attract Catalpa worms, a
large caterpillar prized for fish bait because the skin is
very tough and the caterpillar is juicy. The caterpillar
can be frozen for use as a fish bait at a later time.
The caterpillar can defoliate the tree once or twice a
year but there appear to be no adverse consequences to
the tree.
Catalpa tolerates a wide range of soils, including
pH in the 7’s, and is moderately drought-tolerant. It is
a tough tree suited for planting in large-scale
landscapes.
Pests
The larva of the Catalpa sphinx moth can eat large
quantities of leaves. The caterpillar is yellow with
black markings. The tree is regularly defoliated and
often looks terrible by the end of the summer.
Diseases
Anthracnose will cause dead areas on the leaves.
Brown leaf spots caused by several fungi can
attack Catalpa. They are rarely serious so no chemical
control is suggested.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery coating
on the leaves. When severe, the leaves yellow and fall
off.
Catalpa is susceptible to verticillium wilt.
Branches die and eventually the entire tree may die.
A symptom of verticillium wilt is discoloration of the
sapwood but the symptom is hard to find.
During hot, dry seasons the leaves may turn
yellow and brown due to scorch, but the tree lives.
Little can be done other than watering.
Catalpa may turn chlorotic due to a high soil pH,
but the tree does not appear to otherwise suffer from
alkaline soil.