Fact Sheet ST-131
November 1993
Cedrus atlantica ‘Argentea’
Figure 1. Young Silver Atlas Cedar.
Silver Atlas Cedar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This silver-blue foliaged cultivar is a handsome
evergreen for specimen planting where it will not be
crowded since the tree looks its best when branches
are left on the tree to the ground (Fig. 1). This shows
off the wonderful pyramidal form with lower branches
spreading about half the height. It reaches 40 to 60 or
more feet tall and 30 to 40 feet wide. The trunk stays
fairly straight with lateral branches nearly horizontal.
Allow plenty of room for these to spread. They are
best located as a lawn specimen away from walks,
streets, and sidewalks so branches will not have to be
pruned. The trees are much too large for most
residential properties. It looks odd if lower branches
are removed. Older trees become flat-topped and are a
beautiful sight to behold.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cedrus atlantica ‘Argentea’
Pronunciation: SEE-drus at-LAN-tih-kuh
Common name(s): Silver Atlas Cedar
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-131, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cedrus atlantica ‘Argentea’ -- Silver Atlas Cedar Page 2
Crown shape: pyramidal
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: silver
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Cedrus atlantica ‘Argentea’ -- Silver Atlas Cedar Page 3
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
Figure 3. Foliage of Silver Atlas Cedar.
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Difficult to transplant, it should be moved as a
container plant or root-pruned balled-in-burlap. Soil
preference is for well-drained deep loam, on the acid
side, but it can tolerate sandy or clay soils, if they are
well-drained. The tree looks its best when sheltered
from strong winds but tolerates open conditions, and
will grow in full sun or partial shade. Allow for
plenty of soil space around the tree since growth will
be poor in restricted soil space. Tolerates extensive
drought only when grown in an area where roots can
explore a large soil area. Performs well in all areas
within its hardiness range. It is suitable in zone 9 in
California and perhaps in Florida.
Cultivars: Two other especially desirable cultivars
are Cedrus atlantica ‘Pendula’, a weeping form, and
Cedrus atlantica ‘Glauca’, having beautiful
bluish-white foliage.
Pests
Generally free of insect pests and resistant to
diseases, they may occasionally fall prey to tip blight,
root rots or black scale and the Deodar weevil.
Usually no pest protection or control is necessary.
Sap-suckers are attracted to the trunk and often
riddle it with small holes. This usually does little
lasting harm to the tree.