Fact Sheet ST-134
November 1993
Cedrus deodara
Figure 1. Young Deodar Cedar.
Deodar Cedar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
With its pyramidal shape, soft grayish-green (or
blue) needles and drooping branches, this cedar makes
a graceful specimen or accent tree (Fig. 1). Growing
rapidly to 40 to 50 feet tall and 20 to 30 feet wide, it
also works well as a soft screen. The trunk stays
fairly straight with lateral branches nearly horizontal
and drooping. Lower branches should be left on the
tree so the true form of the tree can show. Allow
plenty of room for these to spread. They are best
located as a lawn specimen away from walks, streets,
and sidewalks so branches will not have to be pruned.
Large specimens have trunks almost three feet in
diameter and spread to 50 feet across.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cedrus deodara
Pronunciation: SEE-drus dee-oh-DAR-uh
Common name(s): Deodar Cedar
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; screen; specimen; residential
street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-134, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cedrus deodara -- Deodar Cedar Page 2
or less identical crown forms
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green; silver
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Cedrus deodara -- Deodar Cedar Page 3
Drought tolerance: high
Figure 3. Foliage of Deodar Cedar.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree has been successfully used as a street or
median planting with lower branches removed. It
appears to tolerate compacted, poor soil but declines in
areas where smog is a problem. Plant on 20-footcenters to create a canopy of blue foliage over a small
residential street. This is probably the best true cedar
for the South.
Transplants easily if root-pruned or from a
container and protected from sweeping winds. It does
well in dry, sunny spots and will tolerate high pH and
clay soil. Cold-damaged trees die back at the top.
There are numerous attractive cultivars. ‘Kashmir’
has silvery foliage and is hardy in USDA hardiness
zone 6; ‘Aurea’ has yellow leaves (looks ill);
‘Pendula’ has long, drooping leaves; ‘Robusta’ has
stiffer twigs.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Perhaps scales, borers, deodar weevils, and bagworms.
Following a cold winter, tops often decline and
dieback in USDA hardiness zone 7. Secondary fungi
can sometimes be associated with this decline.