Fact Sheet ST-136
November 1993
Cedrus libani
Figure 1. Middle-aged Cedar-of-Lebanon.
Cedar-of-Lebanon1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This is a large stately evergreen, with a massive
trunk when mature, and wide-sweeping, sometimes
upright branches (more often horizontal) which
originate on the lower trunk (Fig. 1). Allow plenty of
space for proper development. Dark green needles and
cones, which are held upright above the foliage, add to
the impressive appearance. Young specimens retain a
pyramidal shape but the tree takes on a more open
form with age. Like most true cedars, it does not like
to be transplanted, and prefers a pollution-free, sunny
environment.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cedrus libani
Pronunciation: SEE-drus LIB-an-eye
Common name(s): Cedar-of-Lebanon
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; specimen; residential street
tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-136, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cedrus libani -- Cedar-of-Lebanon Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown; purple
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: blue; green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Cedrus libani -- Cedar-of-Lebanon Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Cedar-of-Lebanon.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Cedars are not well-suited for street tree planting
in downtown situations, but are unrivaled as
specimens, even for hot, dry locations. There are
examples of residential street tree plantings on 20-footcenters which look rather striking. Adapted to high
pH and dry soil.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.