Fact Sheet ST-137
November 1993
Celtis australis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Mediterranean Hackberry.
Mediterranean Hackberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
European Hackberry is a deciduous tree, 40 to 70
feet tall by 40 to 50 feet wide, with smooth, light grey,
somewhat warty bark and a wide, broad, rounded
canopy, making it a good potential shade tree (Fig. 1).
The six-inch-long, sharply toothed leaves are dark
grey/green throughout the year fading to a pale yellow
before falling in autumn. Tiny, round, dark purple
fruits hang in short clusters and are extremely popular
with birds and other wildlife. But they are hard and
people can roll and slip on them when they drop onto
sidewalks and other hard surfaces.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Celtis australis
Pronunciation: SELL-tiss oss-TRAY-liss
Common name(s): Mediterranean Hackberry,
European Hackberry
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 70 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-137, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Celtis australis -- Mediterranean Hackberry Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: bowed; pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Celtis australis -- Mediterranean Hackberry Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Mediterranean Hackberry.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trees benefit from some pruning in the nursery
and landscape. Often, there are only a small number
of large-diameter branches in the crown, and these can
develop embedded bark next to the trunk if they are
allowed to become very large relative to the size of the
trunk. This problem can be avoided by pruning back
these branches to slow their growth so more, smallerdiameter dominant branches develop in the crown. Be
sure that branches arise from the trunk at a wide angle,
and slow the growth of these branches by pruning.
This will help the tree develop a strong branch
structure since Hackberry appears to develop
embedded bark on major branches more often than
some other trees. But large-diameter surface roots can
form (particularly in poorly-drained soil) raising
sidewalks and making mowing grass difficult. Locate
the tree eight feet or more from a sidewalk or street to
help keep them intact.
Hackberry has a reputation for internal trunk rot,
particularly following mechanical injury to the trunk.
Locate the tree so it will not be injured by mowing
equipment or other vehicles, and keep grass away from
the base of the trunk so string trimmers will not cause
injury.
European Hackberry will display quickest growth
in full sun on moist soil but will tolerate poorer soil
conditions very well with slower growth. It is
moderately drought-tolerant.
Propagation is by seed, layering, and cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
twigs may occasionally die from the parasitic fungus
which causes witches’ broom. Affected wood should
simply be removed when noticed. It is not often seen
with the leaf gall which is so common on Celtis
occidentalis.