Fact Sheet ST-140
November 1993
Celtis occidentalis
Figure 1. Mature Common Hackberry.
Common Hackberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The tree forms a rounded vase reaching a height
of 40 to 80 feet, is a rapid grower, and transplants
easily (Fig. 1). The mature bark is light gray, rough
and corky and the small fruit turns from orange red to
purple and is relished by birds. The fruit temporarily
stains walks. Leaves are wider than Celtis laevigata
and more serrated. Hackberry may recover from
transplanting from a field nursery slowly due to the
extensive, coarsely branched root system, but this can
be overcome by planting from containers.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Celtis occidentalis
Pronunciation: SELL-tiss ock-sih-den-TAY-liss
Common name(s): Common Hackberry
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 45 to 80 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-140, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Celtis occidentalis -- Common Hackberry Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; purple; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; showy trunk; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.53
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Celtis occidentalis -- Common Hackberry Page 3
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Figure 3. Foliage of Common Hackberry.
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Hackberry grows naturally in moist bottomland
soil but will grow rapidly in a variety of soil types
from moist, fertile soils to hot, dry, rocky locations in
the full sun. Hackberry is tolerant of highly alkaline
soil whereas Sugarberry is not. It is wind, drought,
salt and pollution tolerant once established and is
considered a moderately tough, urban-tolerant tree.
Skilled pruning is required several times during the
first 15 years of life to prevent formation of weak
branch crotches and weak multiple trunks.
It was extensively used in street plantings in parts
of Texas and in other cities as it tolerates most soils
except extremely alkaline (pH > 8), and grows in sun
or partial shade but branches may break out from the
trunk if proper pruning and training is not conducted
early in the life of the tree. Even slight injury to the
trunk and branches can initiate extensive decay inside
the tree. If you use this tree, locate it where it will be
protected from mechanical injury. Best for low-use
areas such as along the edge of woods or in an open
lawn, not for along streets. The tree is very
susceptible to damage in an ice storm.
One especially nice cultivar is ‘Prairie Pride’, a
quick-growing tree with a uniform, upright, compact
crown. Prune and thin the canopy to prevent
formation of weak, multi-trunk trees.
Pests
The most common insect on Hackberry causes the
Hackberry nipple gall. A pouch or gall forms on the
lower leaf surface in response to feeding. There are
sprays available if you care to reduce this cosmetic
problem.
Scales of various types may be found on
Hackberry. These may be partially controlled with
horticultural oil sprays.
Diseases
Native and planted trees died slowly from an
unknown cause.
Several fungi cause leaf spots on Hackberry. The
disease is worse during wet weather but chemical
controls are seldom needed.
Witches broom is caused by a mite and powdery
mildew. The main symptom is clusters of twigs
scattered throughout the tree crown. Prune out the
clusters of twigs when practical. It is most common
on Celtis occidentalis.
Powdery mildew may coat the leaves with white
powder. The leaves may be uniformly coated or only
in patches.
Mistletoe is an effective colonizer of Hackberry,
which can kill a tree over a period of time. It appears
as evergreen masses several feet in diameter scattered
about the crown.