Fact Sheet ST-142
November 1993
Celtis sinensis
Figure 1. Mature Japanese Hackberry.
Japanese Hackberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Hackberry reaches a height of 40 to 60
feet, is a rapid-grower, and transplants easily (Fig. 1).
It can be 20 to 25 feet tall and wide 10 years after
planting. Trees are very similar to the Common
Hackberry, Celtis occidentalis, just smaller, and the
four-inch-long leaves have wavy, toothed margins.
The mature bark is light grey, rough and corky, and
the small, dark orange-colored fruits are relished by
birds. The seeds are hard and people could slip and
fall on them if they drop on a hard surface.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Celtis sinensis
Pronunciation: SELL-tiss sye-NEN-sis
Common name(s): Japanese Hackberry, Chinese
Hackberry
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; residential street
tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: bowed; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-142, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Celtis sinensis -- Japanese Hackberry Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Celtis sinensis -- Japanese Hackberry Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Hackberry.
Skilled pruning is required several times during
the first 15 years of life to prevent formation of weak
branch crotches and multiple trunks. It could be used
in street plantings where there is plenty of soil space
since it tolerates most soils and grows in sun or partial
shade, but branches may break out from the trunk if
proper pruning and training is not conducted early in
the life of the tree.
The trunk is often injured if the tree is planted too
close to the street in a restricted soil space. Hackberry
has a reputation for internal trunk rot, particularly
following mechanical injury to the trunk. Locate the
tree so it will not be injured by mowing equipment or
other vehicles, and keep grass away from the base of
the trunk so string trimmers will not cause injury.
No leaf galls form on the foliage of this species
which is quite unlike other species of Hackberry. But
large-diameter surface roots can form (particularly in
poorly-drained soil) raising sidewalks and making
mowing grass difficult. Locate the tree eight feet or
more from a sidewalk or street to help keep them
intact.
Japanese Hackberry will grow rapidly in a variety
of soil types from moist, fertile soils to hot, dry
locations in the full sun. It is wind- and droughttolerant once established.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. If this
tree responds similarly to Common Hackberry, the
trunk can rot following mechanical injury. Not seen
with leaf gall which is so common on Celtis
occidentalis.