Fact Sheet ST-138
November 1993
Celtis laevigata
Figure 1. Mature Sugarberry.
Sugarberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This very large, broad, fast growing deciduous
North American native tree has a rounded vase crown
with spreading, pendulous branches (Fig. 1). The
medium-textured, light green leaves turn bright yellow
in fall and can be showy in some years. Leaves have
a longer, more slender tip than Celtis occidentalis.
The grey-brown to silvery bark has some warty
projections or corky ridges, making it attractive in
wintertime. The bark is far less warty than Celtis
occidentalis. Open-grown Sugarberry commonly
reaches 50 to 70 feet in height with a similar spread,
and makes a wonderful shade tree. It could be grown
and used more in urban areas but, unfortunately,
appears to compartmentalize injury poorly, resulting in
branch and trunk rot. Be sure to locate the tree where
mechanical injury will not occur.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Celtis laevigata
Pronunciation: SELL-tiss lee-vih-GAY-tuh
Common name(s): Sugarberry, Sugar Hackberry
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 70 feet
Spread: 50 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaf venation: bowed; banchidodrome; pinnate;
reticulate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-138, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Celtis laevigata -- Sugarberry Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Celtis laevigata -- Sugarberry Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Sugarberry.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tiny, berry-like, sweet fruits attract many
birds, and Sugarberry should be included in any
natural landscape setting. It is not normally grown by
wholesale nurseries. It will grow rapidly and require
regular pruning and training to develop a strong
branch structure and to keep it looking neat in the
nursery. Lack of popularity may be due to the open,
awkward appearance of young trees and susceptibility
to trunk rot in mature trees. But it appears to be no
more sensitive to trunk rot than Laurel Oak. Avoid
injury to the trunk and existing trees will serve you for
many years.
Sugarberry will grow in a variety of soil types but
grows best in moist, fertile soils in a full sun location,
though it will tolerate partial shade. It is sensitive to
highly alkaline soils. Chlorosis develops on alkaline
soil, but witches broom and nipple gall are not a
problem as they are on Celtis occidentalis. Sugarberry
is moderately drought- and salt-tolerant once
established and is very adaptable, growing in wet sites
fairly well. Skilled pruning is required several times
during the first 15 years of life to prevent formation of
weak branch crotches and multiple trunks. But once
this is accomplished, trees should grow with little care.
Avoid pruning large-diameter branches from the trunk
since the tree compartmentalizes decay poorly. A
number of southern cities use Sugarberry as a street
tree while others ban it. Give this tree a try in some
of your urban and suburban landscapes.
The wood is used in much the same way as elm in
the lumber industry for plywood, furniture and veneer.
‘All Seasons’ has a rounded crown, bright yellow
fall foliage, and is very hardy (USDA hardiness zone
5). In the North and Midwest, the native Celtis
occidentalis is used in place of Celtis laevigata.
Somewhat similar in overall appearance, it is a smaller
tree (to 60 feet) with a more warty bark and smaller,
sandpapery leaves than Celtis laevigata.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
The most common insect on Hackberry causes the
Hackberry nipple gall. A pouch or gall forms on the
lower leaf surface in response to feeding. There are
sprays available if you care to reduce this cosmetic
problem, but galls generally do no harm to the tree.
Scales of various types may be found on
Hackberry. These may be controlled with horticultural
oil sprays.
Diseases
Trunk rot, leaf spots, witches broom.
Several fungi cause leaf spots on Hackberry. The
disease is worse during wet weather but chemical
controls are seldom needed.
Generally resistant to witches broom. Witches
broom is caused by a mite and powdery mildew. The
main symptom is clusters of abnormally short twigs
which are scattered throughout the tree crown. Prune
out the clusters of twigs when practical.
Powdery mildew may coat the leaves with white
powder. The leaves may be uniformly coated or only
in patches.
Sugarberry is a favority host for mistletoe.