Fact Sheet ST-151
November 1993
Cercis mexicana
Figure 1. Mature Mexican Redbud.
Mexican Redbud1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Mexican Redbud is a moderate to rapid-grower
when young, reaching a height of 18 to 25 feet (Fig.
1). The splendid purple-pink flowers appear all over
the tree in spring, just before the leaves emerge.
Leaves are considerably smaller than those on Texas
Redbud and Eastern Redbud, and the edges are
distinctly undulating. Mexican Redbud has an
irregular growth habit when young but forms a
graceful flat-topped vase-shape as it gets older. The
tree usually branches low on the trunk, and if left
intact forms a graceful multi-trunked habit. It and
Texas Redbud are the best suited Redbuds for western
and central Texas and Oklahoma.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cercis mexicana
Pronunciation: SER-sis meck-sih-KAY-nuh
Common name(s): Mexican Redbud
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 18 to 25 feet
Spread: 18 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-151, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cercis mexicana -- Mexican Redbud Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: cordate; orbiculate; ovate
Leaf venation: palmate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Cercis mexicana -- Mexican Redbud Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Mexican Redbud.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Be sure to avoid weak forks by pruning to reduce
the size of lateral branches and save those which form
a ‘U’-shaped crotch, not a ‘V’. Keep them less than
half the diameter of the main trunk to increase
longevity of the tree. Do not allow multiple trunks to
grow with tight crotches, instead space branches about
6 to 10 inches apart along a main trunk. Yellow
(although somewhat variable and unreliable) fall color
and tolerance to partial shade make this a suitable,
attractive tree for understory or specimen planting.
Best not used extensively as a street tree due to low
disease resistance and short life, but is nice in
commercial and residential landscapes. Plant in a
shrub border for a spring and fall color display.
Mexican Redbuds grow well in full sun in the
northern part of its range but can benefit from some
shade in the southern zones, particularly in the lower
mid-west where summers are hot. Best growth occurs
in a light, rich, moist soil but it adapts well to a
variety of soil including sandy or alkaline. It grows
well in its native habitat on limestones soils. Trees
look better when they receive some irrigation in
summer dry spells, especially if they are located in a
restricted soil space. Trees are sold as single or multistemmed. Young trees are easiest to transplant and
survive best when planted in the spring or fall.
Containerized trees can be planted anytime. The beans
provide food for some birds. Trees are often shortlived but provide a wonderful show in the spring and
fall.
Cercis are best propagated by seed. Use ripe seed
to plant directly, or, if seed has been stored,
stratification is necessary before sowing in a
greenhouse. Cultivars can be propagated by grafting
onto seedlings, or by summer cuttings under mist or in
a greenhouse.
Pests
Borers attack the trunk of older and stressed
Redbuds. Keep the plant vigorous.
Scale insects can usually be controlled with
horticultural sprays.
Webworm can defoliate parts of the tree in
summer and fall.
Diseases
Canker is the biggest problem with Redbud.
Dieback begins as a canker on a branch. The cankers,
at first small and sunken, enlarge to girdle the branch.
Bark in the canker turns black and a crack forms
between diseased and healthy bark. The fungus enters
through wounds or dead and dying branches. Once
girdled, the part of the stem beyond the canker wilts
and dies. There is no chemical control. Prune out
diseased branches.
Leaf spots can be a problem during wet weather.
Since the disease is rarely serious, no chemical
controls are suggested.
Verticillium wilt attacks and kills Redbud.