Fact Sheet ST-145
November 1993
Cercis canadensis
Figure 1. Mature Eastern Redbud.
Eastern Redbud1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The state tree of Oklahoma, Eastern Redbud is a
moderate to rapid-grower when young, reaching a
height of 20 to 30 feet (Fig. 1). Thirty-year-old
specimens are rare but they can reach 35 feet in height
forming a rounded vase. Trees of this size are often
found on moist sites. The splendid purple-pink
flowers appear all over the tree in spring, just before
the leaves emerge. Eastern Redbud has an irregular
growth habit when young but forms a graceful flattopped vase-shape as it gets older. The tree usually
branches low on the trunk, and if left intact forms a
graceful multitrunked habit. Be sure to avoid weak
forks by pruning to reduce the size of lateral branches
and save those which form a ‘U’-shaped crotch, not a
‘V’. Keep them less than half the diameter of the
main trunk to increase longevity of the tree. Do not
allow multiple trunks to grow with tight crotches,
instead space branches about 6 to 10 inches apart
along a main trunk. Yellow (although somewhat
variable and unreliable) fall color and tolerance to
partial shade make this a suitable, attractive tree for
understory or specimen planting. Best not used
extensively as a street tree due to low disease
resistance and short life, but is nice in commercial and
residential landscapes. Plant in a shrub border for a
spring and fall color display.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cercis canadensis
Pronunciation: SER-sis kan-uh-DEN-sis
Common name(s): Eastern Redbud
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-145, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cercis canadensis -- Eastern Redbud Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: orbiculate; ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate; palmate;
reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender; pink; purple
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Cercis canadensis -- Eastern Redbud Page 3
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Eastern Redbud.
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Eastern Redbuds grow well in full sun in the
northern part of its range but will benefit from some
shade in the southern zones, particularly in the lower
mid-west where summers are hot. Best growth occurs
in a light, rich, moist soil but Eastern Redbud adapts
well to a variety of soil including sandy or alkaline.
Trees look better when they receive some irrigation in
summer dry spells. Its native habitat ranges from
stream bank to dry ridge, demonstrating its
adaptability. Trees are sold as single or multistemmed.
Young trees are easiest to transplant and survive best
when planted in the spring or fall. Containerized trees
can be planted anytime. The beans provide food for
some birds. Trees are short-lived but provide a
wonderful show in the spring and fall.
Several cultivars of Eastern Redbud may be seen:
forma alba - white flowers, blooms about a week later;
‘Pink Charm’ - flowers pink; ‘Pinkbud’ - flowers pink;
‘Purple Leaf’ - young foliage purple; ‘Silver Cloud’ -
leaves variegated with white; ‘Flame’ - more erect
branching, flowers double, blooms later, sterile so no
seed pods form. ‘Forest Pansy’ is a particularly
attractive cultivar with purple-red leaves in the spring,
but color fades to green in the summer in the south.
Cercis canadensis var. texensis ‘Texas White’ and
Cercis reniformis ‘Oklahoma’ have far superior foliage
and make wonderful substitutes for Eastern Redbud,
particularly in non-irrigated areas. These are also
better for central and western Oklahoma and Texas, as
is the Mexican Redbud.
Cercis are best propagated by seed. Use ripe seed
to plant directly, or, if seed has been stored,
stratification is necessary before sowing in a
greenhouse. Cultivars can be propagated by grafting
onto seedlings, or by summer cuttings under mist or in
a greenhouse.
Pests
Borers attack the trunk of older and stressed trees.
Keep the plant vigorous.
Scale insects can usually be controlled with
horticultural sprays.
Webworm can defoliate parts of the tree in
summer and fall.
Cercis canadensis -- Eastern Redbud Page 4
Diseases
Canker is the biggest problem with Eastern
Redbud. Dieback begins as a canker on a branch.
The cankers, at first small and sunken, enlarge to
girdle the branch. Bark in the canker turns black and
a crack forms between diseased and healthy bark. The
fungus enters through wounds or dead and dying
branches. Once girdled, the part of the stem beyond
the canker wilts and dies. There is no chemical
control. Prune out diseased branches.
Leaf spots can be a problem during wet weather.
Since the disease is rarely serious, no chemical
controls are suggested.
Verticillium wilt attacks and kills Eastern Redbud.