Fact Sheet ST-143
November 1993
Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Katsuratree.
Katsuratree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Katsuratree grows best in a sunny exposure and in
a moist soil, but is considered drought-tolerant once
established (Fig. 1). The tree reaches a mature height
and spread of 40 to 60 feet with a symmetrical canopy
and new growth is reddish turning a light pale green.
Fall color is a spectacular yellow, with some red. The
growth rate is moderately rapid when young but slows
down with age. The tree has a shallow root system
and some of the roots can grow to six inches in
diameter or more above the soil. The trunk normally
flares out at the base, gracefully dividing into the
numerous shallow roots often prominent at the soil
surface.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Pronunciation: ser-sih-dih-FILL-um
juh-PAWN-ih-kum
Common name(s): Katsuratree
Family: Cercidiphyllaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; spreading; pyramidal; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-143, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cercidiphyllum japonicum -- Katsuratree Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate
Leaf shape: orbiculate; ovate
Leaf venation: palmate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Cercidiphyllum japonicum -- Katsuratree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Katsuratree.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Katsuratree has an oval or pyramidal form in
youth becoming more upright spreading with age and
makes a good shade tree for residential property due to
the medium stature. Male trees are more upright,
female trees are more spreading. It may also have
uses as a street tree where there is adequate soil space
to prevent surface roots from raising walks and
curbing. Select single stemmed specimens for street
tree use and be sure that the major limbs are well
spaced along a central trunk to prevent branches from
splitting from the tree. Multistemmed trees are also
sold and they make nice specimens for lawn and park
areas, not street trees. Katsuratree has proven to be
fairly pest free. Transplant in spring.
Katsuratree is intolerant of drought and should be
protected from direct exposure to wind. Leaves often
drop in mid to late summer in response to dry weather.
Not suited for compacted soil since the shallow roots
will be a nuisance for lawn and sidewalk maintenance.
Provide irrigation and keep the soil beneath the canopy
mulched. Coarse root system calls for production in
fabric containers, frequent root pruning field-grown
stock, or growing in air root-pruned containers.
The cultivar ‘Pendula’ grows 15 to 25 feet tall and
displays a beautifully graceful, weeping form but it is
hard to find.
Pests and diseases
None serious. Occasionally chewing insects eat
the foliage.