Fact Sheet ST-153
November 1993
Cercis reniformis ‘Oklahoma’
Figure 1. Mature Oklahoma Redbud.
Oklahoma Redbud1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
‘Oklahoma’ Redbud is a deciduous tree, native to
southwestern North America including Texas, which
reaches 30 to 40 feet in height with a 15 to 20-foot
width, and grows slowly into a rounded or vase shape
(Fig. 1). Young trees are a bit irregularly-shaped and
benefit from some training and pruning to form an
upright, more uniform crown. The incredibly shiny,
thick, leathery, dark green leaves have rounded or
notched tips, are two to three inches wide, and turn
yellow before dropping in the fall. The deep pink to
red flowers appear in profusion up and down the tree
limbs in springtime, well before the leaves begin to
emerge, creating probably the best Redbud display.
The four-inch-long seedpods which follow are a lovely
purple color and remain on the tree well into the
winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cercis reniformis ‘Oklahoma’
Pronunciation: SER-sis renn-ih-FOR-miss
Common name(s): Oklahoma Redbud
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-153, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cercis reniformis ‘Oklahoma’ -- Oklahoma Redbud Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: cordate; orbiculate; ovate
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender; pink; purple
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Cercis reniformis ‘Oklahoma’ -- Oklahoma Redbud Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Oklahoma Redbud.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree usually branches low on the trunk and if
left intact forms a graceful multitrunked habit. Be
sure to avoid weak forks by pruning to reduce the size
of lateral branches and saving those which form a ‘U’-
shaped crotch, not a ‘V’. Keep them less than half the
diameter of the main trunk to increase the longevity of
the tree. This will reduce branch splitting. The low
branching habit makes Redbud ideal for use as a
specimen, deck, or patio tree, and it is especially
suited for planting on 15-foot-centers on both sides of
an entry walk or long entrance driveway.
Unfortunately, disease often shortens its life, but the
tree puts on quite a show for a couple of decades and
it is well worth the effort to have to replant at this
time.
‘Oklahoma’ Redbud should be grown in full sun
or partial shade on moist, well-drained soil. This is
one of the nicest (if not the nicest) Redbuds and
should be grown by the industry. The glossy leaves
always draw attention to the tree even by those
unconcerned about trees. It is highly drought tolerant
once established and grows well in all areas within its
hardiness range.
Propagation is by budding only.
Pests
Treehoppers lay eggs under the bark of twigs.
The insect itself is not seen but the white, sticky froth
covering the eggs is quite noticeable.
Scale insects can usually be controlled with
horticultural sprays.
Diseases
Canker is the biggest problem with Redbud. The
fungus enters through wounds or dead and dying
branches. Dieback begins as a canker on a branch.
The cankers, at first small and sunken, enlarge to
girdle the branch. Bark in the canker turns black and
a crack forms between diseased and healthy bark.
Once girdled, the part of the stem beyond the canker
wilts and dies. There is no chemical control. Prune
out diseased branches.
Leaf spots can be a problem during wet weather.
Since the disease is rarely serious, no chemical
controls are suggested.
Verticillium wilt attacks and kills Redbud.
Fertilize affected trees and prune out wilted branches.