Fact Sheet ST-158
November 1993
Chamaecyparis pisifera ‘Filifera’
Figure 1. Middle-aged Sawara Falsecypress.
Sawara Falsecypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sawara Falsecypress grows slowly to about 30 feet
in height and 20 feet wide at the base of the tree, and
has thin, horizontal to pendulous branches of a very
fine texture which forms a dense, broad pyramid (Fig.
1). The very attractive, reddish-brown, smooth,
peeling bark is complemented nicely by the medium
green foliage, but is usually not seen since lower
branches are normally left on the tree and hide the
trunk. This tree is quite popular in oriental and rock
gardens, but can grow to be quite wide, so allow
plenty of room for best form and development.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Chamaecyparis pisifera ‘Filifera’
Pronunciation: kam-eh-SIP-uh-riss pye-SIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Sawara Falsecypress
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-158, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Chamaecyparis pisifera ‘Filifera’ -- Sawara Falsecypress Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Chamaecyparis pisifera ‘Filifera’ -- Sawara Falsecypress Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Sawara Falsecypress.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It is best used as a specimen planting for a large,
open area of a commercial or large residential
landscape. Although it looks great in the nursery, it
often grows too wide for a small residential lot.
Sawara Falsecypress should be grown in full sun
to partial shade on moist, well-drained, non-alkaline
soil in regions with moderate to high humidity.
Although moderately drought tolerant, it is not
especially happy in very hot summers unless provided
with some irrigation. The plants transplant reasonably
well when root pruned. It must be given full sun so
lower branches remain on the tree to provide the best
appearance. Plant looks sloppy if lower branches die
or are removed, and this is not recommended. Locate
the plant properly to eliminate the need for pruning.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
Usually no pests are of major concern, perhaps
bagworm.
Juniper scale is best controlled by applying
pesticides when the crawlers are active.
The bagworm webs dead foliage together to make
a nest. The covering makes the insect difficult to
control. Use sprays of Bacillus thuringiensis. The
nests can be picked off by hand when infestations are
small.
Diseases
Usually no diseases are of major concern.
Phomopsis blight can be a problem on young
plants in nurseries or old plants in landscape situations.
In young plants, branch tips turn brown and die back
until the whole branch or young tree is killed. Tip
blight infects trees during wet weather. The disease
causes sooty pustules on the leaves, bark and cones.
Trees over five years old are less susceptible. When
older trees in landscapes are affected, entire trees are
seldom killed.
Scorch may look like a disease but is caused by
excessive direct sun, freezing stress, drought or mites.
Freezing stress can be prevented by shading small
plants in winter.