Fact Sheet ST-155
November 1993
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis ‘Pendula’
Figure 1. Young Nootka Falsecypress.
Nootka Falsecypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A graceful, weeping, pyramidal evergreen, Nootka
Falsecypress can reach 60 to 90 feet in the wild but
stays within a height of 35 feet and a spread of 20 feet
in cultivation (Fig. 1). The trunk remains straight and
dominant throughout the life of the tree. The long,
pendulous, flattened branches are clothed with dark
bluish-green or grayish-green, scalelike "needles",
which give off a rank odor when bruised or crushed.
Nootka Falsecypress is native to coastal Alaska and
Washington, performing best in areas with high
humidity and moist soil conditions.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Chamaecyparis nootkatensis
‘Pendula’
Pronunciation: kam-eh-SIP-uh-riss
noot-kuh-TEN-sis
Common name(s): Nootka Falsecypress,
Alaska-Cedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-155, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis ‘Pendula’ -- Nootka Falsecypress Page 2
Crown shape: pyramidal; weeping
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.44
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis ‘Pendula’ -- Nootka Falsecypress Page 3
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It makes a striking specimen, with a distinct,
graceful, weeping habit. Even one plant will soften
any landscape. Use it near water or around a patio or
as a lawn specimen in residential or commercial
landscapes. It reportedly does best with some shade
from the afternoon sun, particularly in the southern
part of its range. Trees in full sun look great in zone
5.
Pests
Juniper scale can be controlled by applying
pesticides when the crawlers are active.
The bagworm webs foliage and debris together to
make a case. The covering makes the insect difficult
to control. The nests can be picked off by hand.
Diseases
Blight can be a problem on young plants in
nurseries or old plants in landscape situations. In
young plants, branch tips turn brown and die back
until the whole branch or young tree is killed. Tip
blight infects trees during wet weather. The disease
causes sooty pustules on the leaves, bark and cones.
Trees over five years old are less susceptible.
When older trees in landscapes are affected by tip
blight, entire trees are seldom killed.
Scorch may look like a disease but is caused by
excessive direct sun, freezing stress, drought or mites.
Freezing stress can be prevented by shading small
plants in winter.