Fact Sheet ST-154
November 1993
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana
Figure 1. Mature Lawson Falsecypress.
Lawson Falsecypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Often seen at 40 to 60 feet tall by 15 feet wide in
its cultivated form, this North American native can
soar to heights of 100 to 150 feet in the wild (Fig. 1).
The massive, thick trunk and formal, upright, conical
silhouette is softened by the gently weeping tips of the
short, upright branches. The flattened, dark blue-green
branchlets have a delicate, almost fern-like appearance,
which are nicely complemented by the rough, deeply
furrowed, reddish-brown bark. Available in a wide
variety of forms and bluish foliage colors, Lawson
Falsecypress still remains today an important timber
trees from the Pacific Northwest. But it is rare in the
nursery trade and probably not well adapted to most
landscapes.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Chamaecyparis lawsoniana
Pronunciation: kam-eh-SIP-uh-riss
law-so-nee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Lawson Falsecypress,
Port-Orford-Cedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; screen; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-154, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana -- Lawson Falsecypress Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal; upright
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: blue; red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana -- Lawson Falsecypress Page 3
Wood specific gravity: 0.43
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Lawson Falsecypress is only suited for the largest
landscapes such as in parks, golf courses, large
industrial or commercial landscapes or estates. The
unusually blue foliage and dense, symmetrical growth
habit make it ideally suited as a screen in a sunny spot
protected from constant wind. It has somewhat picky
cultural requirements and should be grown in full sun
in moist, well-drained soil (not clay), in areas of
moderate to high humidity, and preferably where the
trees can be protected from harsh winds. These sites
may be hard to find in the East.
Various cultivars are available with different
foliage colors (golden, blue, or silver-variegated) and
different growth forms (dwarf, columnar, and lowspreading).
Propagation is done easily by cuttings taken in
fall, or by seeds, with difficulty.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
A fungus damages this species by causing root-rot
which eventually kills the tree. Plant only in the most
well-drained soil.
There is also a branch canker which can cause
branch dieback.