Fact Sheet ST-160
November 1993
Chionanthus retusus
Figure 1. Mature Chinese Fringetree.
Chinese Fringetree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
It is hard to think of a more beautiful, small, 20-
foot-tall tree than Chinese Fringetree when it is in full
bloom (Fig. 1). The pure white, fragrant flowers,
emerging just as the dogwood flowers fade, hang in
four-inch-long, spectacular terminal panicles which
appear to cover the tree with snowy white cotton for
two to three weeks. Flowers emerge at the terminal
end of the spring shoot growth flush. This differs
from the native Fringetree which flowers before leaves
emerge. As with other white-flowered trees, Chinese
Fringetree looks best when viewed against a dark
background. Female plants develop purple/blue fruits
which are highly prized by many birds. Fall color is
yellow in northern climates, but is often an unnoticed
brown in the south, with many leaves dropping to the
ground a blackened green. The flowers can be forced
into early bloom indoors.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Chionanthus retusus
Pronunciation: kye-oh-NANTH-us ree-TOO-sus
Common name(s): Chinese Fringetree
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree
pit); residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-160, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Chionanthus retusus -- Chinese Fringetree Page 2
Growth rate: slow
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Chionanthus retusus -- Chinese Fringetree Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Fringetree.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It forms a round ball if left unpruned but can be
trained into a small tree with lower branches removed.
It is naturally multitrunked and is usually found this
way in nurseries but can be trained into a small,
single-trunked specimen. It is probably one of the
finest accents available in the nursery trade! It makes
the perfect patio tree, or can be planted along streets if
provided with occasional summer irrigation. Although
reportedly difficult to transplant, Chinese Fringetree
can be successfully moved quite easily with proper
care. It is usually grown and sold in containers.
Chinese Fringetree looks best in a sunny spot
sheltered from wind. The tree appears more attractive
in the deep south when grown with several hours of
shade but blooms best in full sun, on moist, acid soil,
and will gladly grow in even wet soils. Chinese
Fringetree grows very slowly, usually 4 to 10 inches
per year, but can grow a foot per year if given rich,
moist soil and plenty of fertilizer. Fringetree tolerates
moderate drought but looks best if irrigated
occasionally during extended summer drought.
Propagation is by seed, cuttings, or layering. A
number of horticulturists have figured out how to
reliably germinate Chionanthus virginicus. Perhaps
the techniques apply to the Chinese Fringetree.
Pests
It is generally pest free.
Occasionally mites will infest the foliage.
Diseases
It is generally disease free.
Leaf spots can be caused by several genera of
fungi. Most years, the leaf spots are not a problem
and there is no cause for control.
Chionanthus retusus -- Chinese Fringetree Page 4
Powdery mildews of different genera may attack
Chinese Fringetree.
Stem canker can cause premature defoliation.