Fact Sheet ST-161
November 1993
Chionanthus virginicus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Fringetree.
Fringetree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
It is hard to think of a more beautiful, small tree
than Fringetree when it is in full bloom (Fig. 1). The
upright oval to rounded form adds dark green color in
summer, bright white flowers in spring. The pure
white, slightly fragrant flowers, emerging just as the
dogwood flowers fade, hang in long, spectacular
panicles which appear to cover the tree with cotton for
two weeks. As with other white flowered trees, they
look best when viewed against a dark background.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Chionanthus virginicus
Pronunciation: kye-oh-NANTH-us ver-JIN-ih-kuss
Common name(s): Fringetree, Old-Mans-Beard
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; narrow tree lawns (3-4
feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 20 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-161, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Chionanthus virginicus -- Fringetree Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Chionanthus virginicus -- Fringetree Page 3
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Figure 3. Foliage of Fringetree.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Dark green, glossy leaves emerge later in the
spring than those of most plants just as the flowers are
at peak bloom. This differs from Chinese Fringetree
which flowers at the terminal end of the spring growth
flush. Female plants develop purple-blue fruits which
are highly prized by many birds. Fall color is yellow
in northern climates, but is an unnoticed brown in the
south, with many leaves dropping to the ground a
blackened green. The flowers can be forced into early
bloom indoors.
The plant eventually grows 20 to 30 feet tall in the
woods, spreads to 15 feet, and tolerates city conditions
well. But trees are more commonly seen 10 to 15 feet
tall in landscapes where they are grown in the open.
It forms as a multi-stemmed round ball if left
unpruned but can be trained into a small tree with
lower branches removed. Although reportedly difficult
to transplant, Fringetree can be successfully moved
quite easily with proper care. Could be used beneath
power lines where no pruning would be required.
Fringetree looks best in a sunny spot sheltered
from wind. The foliage appears more attractive when
grown with several hours of shade but the tree blooms
best in full sun. Probably best overall with some
afternoon shade. A North American native commonly
found in upland woods and stream banks throughout
most of the South, Fringetree prefers moist, acid soil
and will gladly grow in even wet soils. It grows very
slowly, usually 6 to 10 inches per year, but can grow a
foot per year if given rich, moist soil and plenty of
fertilizer. There is only one flush of growth each year.
Chionanthus pygmaea (Pygmy Fringetree) is
native to central Florida and is considered an
endangered plant. It produces nice flowers and grows
to only eight feet tall.
Pests
Scale can be controlled with horticultural oil
sprays.
Mites are pests in full sun locations.
Diseases
Leaf spots can be caused by several genera of
fungi. Most years, the leaf spots are not a problem
and there is no cause for control, but they can cause
premature defoliation and spoil fall color display.
Powdery mildews of different genera may attack
Fringetree.
Stem cankers can girdle stems.