Fact Sheet ST-159
November 1993
Chilopsis linearis
Figure 1. Mature Desert-Willow.
Desert-Willow1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American tree is well-known in
hot, dry areas where the soft, willow-like leaves and
beautiful blooms are a welcome relief (Fig. 1).
Desert-Willow reaches 30 feet in height and a width of
25 feet, with fairly loose, open branching. The narrow
leaves are five to 12 inches long and, although
deciduous, provide no appreciable fall color change.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Chilopsis linearis
Pronunciation: kye-LOP-sis lin-ee-AIR-iss
Common name(s): Desert-Willow
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; opposite/subopposite
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: parallel; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender; pink; white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-159, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Chilopsis linearis -- Desert-Willow Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; tan
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Unlike the weak wood of true willows, the wood
of Desert-Willow was used by Indians to craft their
hunting bows. The wood has also been used for fence
posts, and baskets are often woven from the twigs. It
is the blossoms of Desert-Willow which help make it
so special, though, the showy, two to four-inch-long
clusters of 1 to 1.5-inch-long, trumpet-shaped blooms
Chilopsis linearis -- Desert-Willow Page 3
appearing from late spring to early fall, or only during
Figure 3. Foliage of Desert-Willow.
the summer if rainfall is sparse. The blooms occur at
the tips of the branches and on new growth. The
extremely fragrant, orchid-like blooms are most often
seen in shades of lavender and pink but a white variety
is occasionally found. The bees find the blossoms
irresistible and a delightful honey is produced from the
flowers. The narrow, four to 12-inch-long seed
capsules which follow persist on the tree, and the
seeds are quite popular with birds.
The multi-trunked, well branched habit of growth
and thick growth make Desert-Willow well suited for a
wide screen or tall hedge. Groups can be planted in a
large-scale landscape for a splash of color. The tree
has also been popular in residential plantings as
specimens.
Desert-Willow should be grown in full sun and is
extremely drought-tolerant. While the trees will grow
better with adequate moisture, they will not tolerate
overwatering.
Cultivars include ‘Dark Storm’ with burgundy
flowers and ‘Pink Star’ with bright pink flowers.
Propagation is done easily by cuttings.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.