Fact Sheet ST-162
November 1993
Chorisia speciosa
Figure 1. Mature Floss-Silk Tree.
Floss-Silk Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This rounded, deciduous tree eventually has widespreading branches which are green when young and
covered with spines, often becoming grey and
sometimes losing their coarse, sharp spines (Fig. 1).
Young trees can have a columnar or upright form.
The spiny trunk is unusually thick and remains green
even on older trees. Floss-Silk tree can reach 50 feet
in height with an equal or greater spread, and grows
rapidly the first few years, then more slowly. Some
trees maintain a relatively narrow crown with one
straight trunk while others are wide-spreading,
particularly on older specimens. The large, showy,
pink and white, five-petaled flowers, which somewhat
resemble narrow-petaled hibiscus, are produced in
small clusters in fall and winter (usually October)
when the tree is nearly bare. The fruits are large,
eight-inch-long, pear-shaped, woody capsules, filled
with silky, white, kapok-like floss and pea-like seeds.
Floss from the seeds was used for stuffing pillows and
thin strips of the bark have been used to make rope.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Chorisia speciosa
Pronunciation: koe-RIZZ-ee-uh spee-see-OH-suh
Common name(s): Floss-Silk Tree
Family: Bombacaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; specimen; residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 50 feet
Spread: 40 to 55 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; pyramidal; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-162, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Chorisia speciosa -- Floss-Silk Tree Page 2
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval)
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; very showy;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; white
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; should be grown with a single
leader; thorns are present on the trunk or branches;
very showy trunk
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Chorisia speciosa -- Floss-Silk Tree Page 3
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
Figure 3. Foliage of Floss-Silk Tree.
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
An excellent specimen tree for parks, parking lots,
and other large landscapes, Floss-Silk tree is
spectacular when in bloom, producing an outstanding
show of color in the fall. Large roots often form at
the base of the trunk just beneath the soil, so be
careful not to plant the tree too close to sidewalks or
pavement. Fifteen feet from curbs, driveways and
sidewalks should be adequate.
Prune the tree to be sure that only one central
trunk develops when the tree is young. The central
leader becomes less vigorous in middle age, allowing
lateral limbs to develop into the main structure of the
tree producing a spreading form. Although most
branches are horizontal and well-attached to the tree,
upright branches can develop with embedded bark
which can cause a branch to split from the trunk.
Prevent this by pruning the major limbs so they remain
less than half the diameter of the trunk.
Flowering best in full sun, Floss-Silk tree will
thrive on any reasonably fertile soil with good
drainage. It is not salt tolerant but does tolerate high
pH. Grafted trees are preferred as they bloom earlier
and at a smaller size.
Two grafted selections are available: ‘Majestic
Beauty’ has rich pink flowers and ‘Los Angeles
Beautiful’ has wine red flowers. The cultivar ‘Monsa’
has a thornless trunk and pink fall flowers.
Propagation is by seed or grafting.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.