Fact Sheet ST-169
November 1993
Citrus spp.
Figure 1. Young Citrus.
Citrus1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The dense, rounded crown of dark green,
evergreen foliage and the pure white, extremely
fragrant blossoms make citrus a popular garden choice
for frost-free locations (Fig. 1). Ranging from 12 to
30 feet in height and 8 to 25 feet in width, depending
upon species and cultivar, citrus can be used for shade,
to screen unwanted views, or smaller varieties can be
used in containers. The juicy, fragrant fruits vary from
yellow, orange, or red, and are most noticeable in
winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Citrus spp.
Pronunciation: SIH-trus species
Common name(s): Citrus
Family: Rutaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: espalier; fruit tree; hedge; recommended for
buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; near a deck or patio; screen;
trainable as a standard; specimen; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple; trifoliate
Leaflet margin: crenate; serrulate
Leaflet shape: obovate; ovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-169, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Citrus spp. -- Citrus Page 2
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; orange; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Citrus spp. -- Citrus Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Citrus.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The green, thorny branches will rarely need
pruning after a strong branch structure is developed.
Prune so there is no bark embedded or pinched
together in the branch crotches. This condition could
cause the branch to break from the trunk when fruit
loads it down. Prune out enough of the foliage on
lateral branches so they remain less than half the
diameter of the trunk.
Citrus should be grown in full sun on welldrained, slightly acid soil, and watered faithfully. Do
not mulch the soil beneath citrus. It is very heattolerant and can be effectively used in a tough urban
site such as a parking lot if dropping fruits will not
pose a problem.
Many species of citrus are available. Citrus limon
gives us lemons; Citrus reticulata, tangerines or
Mandarin oranges; Citrus sinensis, sweet orange;
Citrus aurantifolia, key limes; and Citrus paradisi,
grapefruit.
Propagation is by grafting or layering.
Pests
Nematodes, scales, whiteflies, mites, caterpillars,
fruitfly.
Diseases
Virus and fungus diseases. Twig galls sometimes
form in response to a fungus infection.