Fact Sheet ST-170
November 1993
Cladrastis kentukea
Figure 1. Young American Yellowwood.
American Yellowwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Yellowwood is so-named because the freshly-cut
heartwood is a muted to brilliant yellow color, and the
wood is known to yield a yellow dye (Fig. 1). This
seldom-used, native, deciduous tree makes a very
striking specimen or shade tree, reaches 30 to 50,
rarely 75 feet in height, with a broad, rounded canopy,
and has a vase-shaped, moderately dense silhouette.
Smooth, grey to brown bark, bright green, pinnately
compound, 8 to 12-inch-long leaflets, and a strikingly
beautiful display of white, fragrant blossoms make
Yellowwood a wonderful choice for multiple landscape
uses.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cladrastis kentukea
Pronunciation: kluh-DRASS-tiss ken-TUCK-ee-uh
Common name(s): American Yellowwood, Virgilia
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; specimen; residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-170, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cladrastis kentukea -- American Yellowwood Page 2
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: white
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Cladrastis kentukea -- American Yellowwood Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of American Yellowwood.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The one-inch-wide, fragrant flowers appear in
dense, showy, pendulous, terminal panicles, 12 to 14
inches long, in early summer and are set off nicely
against the lush foliage. Flowers are visited by a large
number of bees. Trees may not flower until they are
10-years-old and then seem to give outstanding
displays only in cycles of every two to five years but
the gorgeous display is well worth the wait. The
flowers are followed by showy, three to four-inchlong, whitish-grey pods which persist through the
winter.
Unpruned trees fall apart in 30 to 40 years.
Yellowwood should be pruned when young to develop
branches having a wide angle with the trunk and a
‘U’-shaped crotch. These should be pruned back so
that they are not allowed to grow larger than half the
diameter of the trunk. Develop 7 to 10 major lateral
limbs spaced along the trunk, not clustered together.
Good luck! This will help them develop strong
attachments to the trunk and provide for a longer-lived
tree than one which is not pruned in this way.
Weakly-attached branches with embedded bark are
susceptible to breakage and may be a problem as the
tree grows older. Any pruning should be done in
summertime because excess bleeding may occur if
done in the winter or spring. It could be used as street
tree if properly pruned to avoid weak crotches. It is
often planted as a specimen or shade tree for smaller
properties due to its flowers and medium size.
Yellowwood grows slowly in full sun on moist,
well-drained soils but growth may be more rapid if
provided with some shade in the southern part of its
range and in the plains states. It grows slowly on poor
soil but looks fine, responding to better soil with
moderate growth. It tolerates alkaline (it is native to
dry limestone outcroppings as well as along stream
banks) or acidic soil and urban conditions. It performs
well with only occasional irrigation once established,
even in poor, compacted soils. It adapts to wet soils
by growing a shallow root system. There are several
very large, coarsely-branched roots dominating the root
system which makes care following transplanting very
crucial. But planting from containers is no problem.
The cultivar ‘Rosea’ has pinkish flowers.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Verticillium wilt may occasionally be a problem.