Fact Sheet ST-171
November 1993
Clerodendron trichotomum
Figure 1. Young Harlequin Glorybower.
Harlequin Glorybower1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This non-native deciduous shrub or small tree is
usually 6 to 10 feet in height with multiple trunks,
creating much the appearance of a large shrub (Fig. 1).
A small tree can be produced by staking the plant until
a sturdy trunk develops. The dark green leaves are
oval, five inches long and covered with a soft fuzz. In
late summer in the full sun, the tree is festooned with
beautiful clusters of delightfully fragrant, white,
tubular flowers. The fruits which follow are
blue/green and metallic-looking. Flowers and fruits
can sometimes be found on the plant at the same time.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Clerodendron trichotomum
Pronunciation: kleer-oh-DEN-drawn
trick-oh-TOE-mum
Common name(s): Harlequin Glorybower
Family: Verbenaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
near a deck or patio; trainable as a standard; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 6 to 12 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-171, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Clerodendron trichotomum -- Harlequin Glorybower Page 2
Leaf venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; reddish
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Clerodendron trichotomum -- Harlequin Glorybower Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This large shrub or small tree can grow more like
a vine if it is not trained and pruned. It can be used
near the patio or deck as a flowering ornamental, or
placed in a container in a prominent location for
display. Not the best looking plant when not in
flower, you may want to hide it for 10 months and
then ‘bring it out’ when it flowers.
Harlequin Glorybower should be grown in full sun
or partial shade with sufficient room to allow the plant
to spread out. Often the bottom half of the plant
appears leggy and should be camouflaged by
underplantings. Sprouts and suckers regularly develop
at the base of the plant.