Fact Sheet ST-172
November 1993
Clusia rosea
Figure 1. Middle-aged Pitch-Apple.
Pitch-Apple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This wide-spreading, densely-foliated, rounded, 25
to 30-foot-tall, evergreen tree has a short trunk and
broad, thickened, dark green, leathery leaves,
reminiscent of Southern Magnolia leaves (Fig. 1). It
is, in fact, greatly admired in Cuba and the Virgin
Islands as an ornamental. Leaves can be written on
with a fingernail. In summer, the showy, pink and
white, two to three-inch flowers appear at night and
sometimes remain open all morning on overcast days.
They appear near the branch tips and are followed by
a fleshy, light green, poisonous fruit, three inches in
diameter. These persistent fruits turn black when ripe
and split open, revealing bright red seeds surrounded
by a black, resinous material. The seeds are very
attractive to birds and other wildlife and they
germinate readily in the landscape and surrounding
areas. The black material surrounding these seeds was
once used to caulk the seams of boats, hence its
common name, ‘Pitch-Apple’.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Clusia rosea
Pronunciation: KLOO-see-uh ROE-zee-uh
Common name(s): Pitch-Apple, Florida Clusia
Family: Clusiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; trainable as a
standard; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-172, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Clusia rosea -- Pitch-Apple Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent
on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Clusia rosea -- Pitch-Apple Page 3
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Pitch-Apple.
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing well in full sun to dappled shade, PitchApple tolerates many different soil types but grows
most rapidly on moist soils. It is quite tolerant of light
open sands and salt spray, making it ideal for seaside
locations. Pitch-Apple is often used as a screen due to
its low spreading habit and is ideal for espalier to cool
building walls in the summer. Some maintenance is
required to trim prop roots and aerial roots as they
form from the trunk base and lower branches, or the
tree could take over an area. Otherwise, it is a lowmaintenance tree. With lower branches removed, it
can make an attractive, small to moderately-sized
street tree, although some people object to the falling
fruits and thick slowly decomposing leaves. A patio
can be kept cooler with a Pitch-Apple which creates a
dense shade. Plants should be watered well until
established and then trees develop rapidly.
Purchase trees which have been trained in the
nursery to one central leader for street tree use. Those
grown for specimen use with several upright trunks are
not suited for streets, as vehicle clearance will be
difficult to maintain and trees will be less durable.
The cultivar with marbled leaves, Clusia rosea
‘Variegata’, has unusual and very striking, yellow and
green variegated foliage.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings.
Pests
Scale.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.