Fact Sheet ST-176
November 1993
Coccothrinax argentata
Figure 1. Young Silverpalm.
Silverpalm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This slow-growing, small, native Florida palm can
reach 20 feet in height but is usually seen at 6 to 10
feet with a spread of six feet (Fig. 1). The slender
Silverpalm has distinctive dark blue-green, drooping,
delicate, deeply divided palmate leaves which have a
beautiful silver color beneath, providing a bright glint
in the landscape when the leaves sway in the wind.
The six-inch-wide trunk is either smooth and grey or is
sometimes covered with woven, burlap-like fiber. The
small, white flowers are borne in profusion on twofoot-long stalks, hidden among the leaves during the
summer. The small, round, purple fruits ripen in late
summer and fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Coccothrinax argentata
Pronunciation: koe-koe-THRY-nacks
ar-jen-TAY-tuh
Common name(s): Silverpalm, Thatchpalm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 6 to 15 feet
Spread: 6 to 7 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-176, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Coccothrinax argentata -- Silverpalm Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 18 to 36 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green; silver
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Coccothrinax argentata -- Silverpalm Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Silverpalm.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This palm is most suited for residential and
commercial landscapes were the unusual blue foliage
can be appreciated. It makes a nice accent in a shrub
border, and can be massed together to create a
dramatic colorful impact. Place it in a low-growing
groundcover to provide an exclamation point in the
landscape.
Growing in full sun or partial shade, Silverpalm
will tolerate any well-drained soil. The palm will
grow straight up and provide a beautiful blue accent,
even in areas receiving only two or three hours of sun.
It is highly salt-tolerant and is especially useful for
coastal locations and for soils with a high pH.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.