Fact Sheet ST-175
November 1993
Coccoloba uvifera
Figure 1. Middle-aged Seagrape.
Seagrape1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Reaching a height of 25 to 30 feet, Seagrape can
take on a variety of shapes, depending upon its
location but typically forms a multi-stemmed vase
shape if left unpruned (Fig. 1). The large, almost
circular, broad, leathery, evergreen leaves of Seagrape
have distinctive red veins. The leaves frequently turn
completely red before they fall in winter. The new
young foliage is a beautiful bronze color which is set
off nicely against the dark green, shiny leaves. The
inconspicuous ivory flowers are produced on foot-long
racemes and are followed by dense clusters of 3/4-inch
diameter green grapes on female trees only, ripening to
a luscious deep purple in late summer. Males do not
produce fruit. The grapes are often used to make a
delicious jelly and are also popular with birds and
squirrels.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Coccoloba uvifera
Pronunciation: koe-koe-LOE-buh yoo-VIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Seagrape
Family: Polygonaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; fruit tree; hedge; wide tree lawns (>6
feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; shade tree; specimen; residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-175, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Coccoloba uvifera -- Seagrape Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: orbiculate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round (Fig. 3)
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Coccoloba uvifera -- Seagrape Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Fruit of Seagrape.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The contorted, twisting trunk (which can grow to
two feet in diameter) and upright branching habit
makes Seagrape an interesting, picturesque shade tree
or specimen planting or, it can be pruned into a dense
hedge, screen, or windbreak. Because of its size and
coarse texture, Seagrape as a clipped hedge is more
suited to foundation plantings for large buildings
where it will lend a tropical effect. It is also used as a
seaside hedge in commercial landscapes, but requires
hand pruning, since the large leaves do not lend
themselves well to shearing.
Pruning is required two or three times during the
first 10 years after planting to train the multiple trunks
so they are well-attached to the tree. Be sure branches
do not develop embedded bark, since they will be
poorly attached to the trunk and could split from the
trunk. But the wood and the tree is generally very
strong and durable following this developmental and
corrective pruning. The tree will then perform well
with little care, except for occasional pruning of lower
branches to create clearance for vehicles. Some
people object to the litter created by the large, slowlydecomposing leaves which fall from the tree during the
year.
Requiring full sun and sandy, well-drained soils,
Seagrape is excellent for seaside locations since it is
highly salt- and drought-tolerant. Plants should be
well-watered until established and then should only
require occasional pruning to control shape.
There is a variegated cultivar available.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests
Stems are subject to Seagrape borer which can kill
branches.
A nipple gall causes raised, red nipples on the
upper leaf surface.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.