Fact Sheet ST-174
November 1993
Coccoloba diversifolia
Figure 1. Middle-aged Pigeon-Plum.
Pigeon-Plum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This upright, densely-foliated, rounded evergreen
tree is usually seen at 15 to 25 feet and a spread of 20
to 35 feet, though it can grow larger (Fig. 1). Young
trees appear pyramidal until the multiple trunks begin
spreading. This can form a rounded vase on older
specimens. It is a wonderful small to medium-sized
tree for subtropical landscapes, typically sporting a
multiple trunk. Trunks often grow almost parallel to
each other, and embedded or included bark forms
regularly, but this does not appear to compromise the
wood strength of Pigeon-Plum. The four-inch-long,
shiny, dark green, leathery leaves drop uniformly in
March but quickly emerge as bright red new growth.
The small, whitish-green flowers are abundantly
produced on two to three-inch-long racemes in early
summer, followed by 1/3-inch-long, purple, pearshaped fruit. The single-seeded, somewhat edible
fruits ripen in late fall and winter and are very
attractive to birds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Coccoloba diversifolia
Pronunciation: koe-koe-LOE-buh
dye-ver-sih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Pigeon-Plum
Family: Polygonaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns
(4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation plant;
shade tree; specimen; residential street tree; tree has
been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-174, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Coccoloba diversifolia -- Pigeon-Plum Page 2
Crown shape: round; upright; vase shape
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to
grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Coccoloba diversifolia -- Pigeon-Plum Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Pigeon-Plum.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although Pigeon-Plum makes a wonderful shade
tree, the fallen fruit may create a litter problem on
patios and sidewalks, and along streets. But the twomonth inconvenience of messy fruit may be a small
price to pay for the wonderful effect this striking tree
creates along streets or in a residential yard. Lower
branches will need to be removed over time for
vehicle clearance along streets, but there is a definite
place for the tree along boulevards where cars will not
park. The one to two-foot-wide, straight, upright
trunks have grayish-brown bark that falls off in plates
to reveal dark purplish bark beneath, helping to make
Pigeon-Plum a wonderful specimen tree. It looks
striking as a specimen lighted at night from beneath
the canopy. Trees trained to a single trunk in the
nursery can be very useful for planting along streets
where vehicle clearance is needed.
Fast-growing in full sun or partial shade, PigeonPlum does best on moist, well-drained soils. It has
good salt tolerance. Be sure to slice and otherwise
drastically disturb and pull apart the root ball on pot
bound, container-grown trees. Pot-bound trees have a
reputation for rooting out poorly into landscape soil.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Chewing insects will occasionally riddle the new
growth, but control is not usually required.