Fact Sheet ST-177
November 1993
Cocos nucifera
Figure 1. Middle-aged Coconut Palm.
Coconut Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The Coconut Palm is one of man’s most useful
plants (Fig. 1). The heavy crown of long flowing
fronds and gently curved trunks lend a tropical effect
to any landscape setting in which they can grow. A
beautiful street tree, Coconut Palm is also ideal as a
background tree, framing tree, or as a striking
freestanding specimen. Coconut Palms located along
streets, walkways or near patios require pruning to
remove the flowers or developing fruit so it doesn’t
fall and cause injury or property damage.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cocos nucifera
Pronunciation: KOE-koase noo-SIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Coconut Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: fruit tree; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-177, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cocos nucifera -- Coconut Palm Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: linear
Leaflet venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 18 to 36 inches
Leaf color: green; yellow
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round (Fig. 3)
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Cocos nucifera -- Coconut Palm Page 3
Figure 3. Fruit of Coconut Palm.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Due to the widespread devastation of lethal
yellowing disease, use the resistant Malayan strains,
often called dwarf or pygmy coconuts, and labelled
yellow, golden, red, and green, according to the color
of their fruits, such as ‘Golden Malayan Dwarf’. It is
best to purchase trees from a nursery that can assure
you that the palms were grown from certified Malayan
seed. The Malayan palms are very similar to the
Jamaican Tall except for having straight trunks. The
red strain is the most rugged of the three but has the
least attractive foliage. The variety ‘Maypan’, a
hybrid of Malayan x Panama Tall, has the most robust
and rapid growth yet retains its resistance to lethal
yellowing disease. All Coconut Palms are highly salttolerant and make nice street trees if planted when
they are tall enough. Be aware that falling fruit can
damage vehicles or hit pedestrians and the flower
stalks (in spring) or developing fruit (summer) may
need to be removed.
Coconut Palms grow in full sun on any welldrained soils. Plants respond well to being fertilized.
Propagation is by seed. The large coconuts, with
outer husk, should be half-buried on their side in soil.
Germination can take many months.
Pests
Nematodes may infest this palm.
Diseases
Lethal yellowing disease, virus diseases, and fungi
all affect Coconut Palms. Be sure to only plant
selections which are resistant to lethal yellowing
disease. Ganoderma butt rot can infect the lower trunk
and roots, and can kill the palm. Avoid injury to the
palm in this area. There is no control for butt rot,
only prevention.