Fact Sheet ST-179
November 1993
Conocarpus erectus
Figure 1. Mature Buttonwood.
Buttonwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This low-branching, multi-trunked, shrubby,
evergreen tree has glaucous medium-green leaves (Fig.
1). The inconspicuous, small, greenish flowers appear
in dense conelike heads in terminal panicles in spring
and are followed by 1/2-inch, conelike, red-brown
fruits. The dark brown attractive bark is ridged and
scaly. The tree is ‘clean’ with small leaves which fall
between the grass blades of the lawn or are easily
washed away in the rain.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Conocarpus erectus
Pronunciation: kawn-oh-KAR-pus ee-RECK-tus
Common name(s): Buttonwood
Family: Combretaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200
square feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; shade tree; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: spreading; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-179, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Conocarpus erectus -- Buttonwood Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: purple; white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; year round flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Conocarpus erectus -- Buttonwood Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Buttonwood.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Capable of reaching a height of 40 feet with a 20-
foot spread, Buttonwood is often seen as a small,
somewhat asymmetrical shrub but is ideal for use as a
screen, clipped hedge, or specimen planting. The
species is less common and grows taller than the
Silver Buttonwood. Due to the attractive bark and soft
foliage, a multistemmed specimen can make a nice
patio or street tree. Planted in the open as a tree,
Buttonwood will grow to about 20 to 25 feet tall and
wide, and will often take on a picturesque, contorted
appearance when exposed to constant seashore winds,
creating an attractive specimen. The crown is more
symmetrical 1/2 mile or more from the coast or on the
inland side of a tall ocean-front building. The wood
of Buttonwood was formerly used for firewood,
cabinetwork, and charcoal making and is very strong.
It is an ideal wood for smoking meats and fish.
Included or embedded bark often develops in major
branch crotches, but the strong wood appears to
compensate for this potential defect. Trees are tough
and long-lasting in the landscape.
A Florida native, Buttonwood is ideal for seaside
plantings as it is highly tolerant of full sun, sandy
soils, and salty conditions. It also tolerates brackish
areas and alkaline soils, thriving in the broken shade
and wet soils of hammocks. This is a tough tree! It
withstands the rigors of urban conditions very well and
makes a durable street or parking lot tree. Due to its
small size, plant on 15-foot centers to form a closed
canopy along a street. Purchase single-trunked trees
for street and parking lot plantings.
The cultivar ‘Mombo’ has a dense crown and may
be smaller than the species, 15 to 20 feet tall.
Pests
Sucking insect secretions will result in problems
with sooty mold on trees inland from the coast.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.