Fact Sheet ST-182
November 1993
Cordia sebestena
Figure 1. Young Geiger-Tree.
Geiger-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This dense, rounded, evergreen native tree grows
slowly to a height of 25 feet with an equal spread and
can develop a trunk 12 inches thick (Fig. 1). The
large, seven-inch-long, stiff, dark green leaves are
rough and hairy, feeling much like sandpaper.
Appearing throughout the year, but especially in spring
and summer, are dark orange, two-inch-wide flowers
which appear in clusters at branch tips. The splendid
flowers are followed by one to two-inch-long, pearshaped fruits, which have a pleasant fragrance but are
not particularly tasty.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cordia sebestena
Pronunciation: KOR-dee-uh seb-ess-TAY-nuh
Common name(s): Geiger-Tree
Family: Boraginaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; shade tree; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-182, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cordia sebestena -- Geiger-Tree Page 2
Crown density: moderate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: undulate
Leaf shape: cordate; ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: orange
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; white
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.70
Cordia sebestena -- Geiger-Tree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Geiger-Tree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Geiger-Tree is quite salt- and brackish-water
tolerant, making it ideal for use in coastal landscapes
as a free-standing specimen, patio or framing tree.
Most specimens are seen as multitrunked and lowbranching but nurseries can produce single-trunked
trees suitable for downtown and parking lots. It has
been used as a street tree in some communities but
drops leaves as a drought-avoidance strategy in
prolonged dry spells. According to legend, the
common name was bestowed by Audubon in
commemoration of John Geiger, a Key West pilot and
wrecker of the 19th century and is now used quite
universally as the common name for this excellent
Florida native tree.
Growing in full sun to partial shade, Geiger-Tree
is tolerant of light, sandy, alkaline soils and salt-spray.
It is highly recommended for seaside plantings. Do
not plant where there is the slightest danger of frost.
Cordia boissieri is frost-resistant (tolerating
temperatures in the high 20’s) and has stunning white
flowers with yellow centers.
Propagation is by seeds or layering.
Pests
Mites, scales, and caterpillars will occasionally
attack Geiger-Tree. The geiger beetle defoliates the
tree upon occasion but the trees generally grow out of
it and do fine. The problem can be locally
troublesome.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.