Fact Sheet ST-181
November 1993
Cordia boissieri
Figure 1. Middle-aged Wild-Olive.
Wild-Olive1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Wild-Olive is a native North American evergreen
tree which reaches 20 feet in height with a 10 to 15-
foot spread (Fig. 1). This small tree is very rarely
found and is even reportedly close to extinction. The
silvery green leaves have a velvety texture and the
showy, white flowers appear year-round, if enough
rainfall or irrigation is available. Otherwise, the threeinch-wide, trumpet-shaped, white blossoms with
yellow throats will appear from late spring to early
summer. The olive-like, white fruits which are
produced have a sweet flesh relished by birds and
other wildlife and, although edible to man, should not
be eaten in quantities.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cordia boissieri
Pronunciation: KOR-dee-uh boy-see-AIR-ee
Common name(s): Wild-Olive, Anacahuita
Family: Boraginaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; trainable as a
standard; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet
in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-181, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cordia boissieri -- Wild-Olive Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green; silver
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Cordia boissieri -- Wild-Olive Page 3
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of Wild-Olive.
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This is a versatile plant adapted for use as a
specimen tree or as an accent in a shrub border.
Showy, year-round flowers make it suitable for placing
in a lawn area as a free-standing specimen. It can be
planted in an above-ground container and kept looking
nice for a number of years when it is carefully
maintained.
Wild-olive should be grown in full sun or partial
shade on well-drained soils and is highly droughttolerant. Although hardy to about 20-degrees F.,
Wild-Olive will lose its leaves in a severe frost. This
is the cold-hardy relative of Cordia sebestena which is
very sensitive to the cold.
Propagation is by seeds and air-layering.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.