Fact Sheet ST-199
November 1993
Cornus walteri
Figure 1. Mature Walter Dogwood.
Walter Dogwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Walter Dogwood is a medium-sized deciduous tree
reaching 30 to 40 feet in height and width (Fig. 1).
The two to five-inch-long leaves are dark green and
are joined in June by the small white flowers arranged
in two to three-inch diameter cymes. The blossoms
are followed by the production of small black fruits
which are popular with birds and other wildlife.
Walter Dogwood is probably best known for the
alligator-like bark on older specimens, even more so
than Flowering Dogwood. Young specimens have an
upright branching habit giving way to an open
spreading habit. The branches probably droop less
than most other Dogwoods, making it a possible
candidate for street tree use although they have not
been tested for this in the United States. Most
certainly a good patio tree providing shade quickly.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cornus walteri
Pronunciation: KOR-nus WALL-ter-eye
Common name(s): Walter Dogwood
Family: Cornaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: near a deck or patio; shade tree; residential
street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-199, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cornus walteri -- Walter Dogwood Page 2
Crown shape: vase shape
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Cornus walteri -- Walter Dogwood Page 3
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
Figure 3. Foliage of Walter Dogwood.
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Grown in the full sun it develops a dense canopy
but is more open and perhaps more attractive in partial
shade. The plant is now rare in the industry but
deserves to be tried. It is highly drought tolerant and
grows well in clay soil.
Propagation is by cuttings or seed.
Pests
No pests are of major concern at this time.
Diseases
Possibly leaf spot, twig blight, or canker. See
diseases section of Flowering Dogwood.