Fact Sheet ST-185
November 1993
Cornus florida
Figure 1. Middle-aged Flowering Dogwood.
Flowering Dogwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The state tree of Virginia, Flowering Dogwood
grows 20 to 35 feet tall and spreads 25 to 30 feet (Fig.
1). It can be trained with one central trunk or as a
picturesque multi-trunked tree. The flowers consist of
four bracts which subtend the small head of yellow
flowers. The bracts may be pink or red depending on
cultivar but the species color is white. The fall color
depends on site and seed source but on most sun
grown plants will be red to maroon. The bright red
fruits are often eaten by birds. Fall color is more
vivid in USDA hardiness zones 5 to 8a. Branches on
the lower half of the crown grow horizontally, those in
the upper half are more upright. In time, this can lend
a strikingly horizontal impact to the landscape,
particularly if some branches are thinned to open up
the crown. Lower branches left on the trunk will
droop to the ground, creating a wonderful landscape
feature.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cornus florida
Pronunciation: KOR-nus FLOR-ih-duh
Common name(s): Flowering Dogwood
Family: Cornaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); near a deck or patio;
screen; shade tree; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-185, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cornus florida -- Flowering Dogwood Page 2
Growth rate: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: bowed; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Cornus florida -- Flowering Dogwood Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Flowering Dogwood.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree is not suited for parking lot planting but
can be grown in a wide street median, if provided with
less than full-day sun and irrigation. Dogwood is a
standard tree in many gardens where it is used by the
patio for light shade, in the shrub border to add spring
and fall color or as a specimen in the lawn or
groundcover bed. It can be grown in sun or shade but
shaded trees will be less dense, grow more quickly and
taller, have poor fall color, and less flowers. Trees
prefer part shade (preferably in the afternoon) in the
southern end of its range. Many nurseries grow the
trees in full sun, but they are irrigated regularly.
Flowering Dogwood prefers a deep, rich, well-drained,
sandy or clay soil and has a moderately long life. It is
not recommended in the New Orleans area and other
heavy, wet soils unless it is grown on a raised bed to
keep roots on the dry side. The roots will rot in soils
without adequate drainage.
Several of the cultivars listed are not readily
available. Pink-flowering cultivars grow poorly in
USDA hardiness zones 8 and 9. ‘Apple Blossom’ -
pink bracts; ‘Cherokee Chief’ - red bracts; ‘Cherokee
Princess’ - white bracts; ‘Cloud 9’ - white bracts,
many blooms, flowers at early age; ‘Fastigiata’ -
upright growth while young, spreading with age; ‘First
Lady’ - leaves variegated with yellow turning red and
maroon in the fall; ‘Gigantea’ - bracts six inches from
tip of one bract to tip of opposite bract; ‘Magnifica’ -
bracts rounded, four-inch-diameter pairs of bracts;
‘Multibracteata’ - double flowers; ‘New Hampshire’ -
flower buds cold hardy; ‘Pendula’ - weeping or
drooping branches; ‘Plena’ - double flowers; var.
rubra - pink bracts; ‘Spring Song’ - bracts rose red;
‘Springtime’ - bracts white, large, blooms at an early
age; ‘Sunset’ - supposedly resistant to anthracnose;
‘Sweetwater Red’ - bracts red; ‘Weaver’s White’ -
large white flowers, adapted to the south; ‘Welchii’ -
leaves variegated with yellow and red; ‘White Cloud’ -
flowers more numerous, bracts white; ‘Xanthocarpa’-
fruit yellow.
Pests
Aphids may be controlled by spraying them with a
strong stream of water from the garden hose.
Several borers will attack dogwood. Try to keep
the trees healthy with regular fertilization, and
irrigation during dry weather. Indications of borer
problems are holes in the trunk, leaves smaller than
normal, and dieback of the crown.
Dogwood club gall midge causes galls at the
branch tips. The leaves on affected branch tips may
be distorted and the branch may fail to form a flower
bud. Prune out the galls as soon as they are seen.
Leaf miners cause brown blister-like mines on the
undersides of leaves. The adult leaf miner
skeletonizes the leaves.
Scales can build up to large numbers before being
detected. Horticultural oil will help control
overwintering stages.
Cornus florida -- Flowering Dogwood Page 4
Twig girdlers prune the tips of small branches.
They are more of an annoyance than a serious problem
unless you are a nursery operator.
Diseases
Dogwood anthracnose may be the biggest concern
with growing Flowering Dogwood. Infection is
favored by cool, wet spring or fall weather. Drought
and stressed trees appear to be most affected, as are
those at higher elevations. Trees on the coastal plain
may be much less likely to become affected.
Consecutive years of infection can kill trees. Keep the
tree healthy with regular irrigation in dry weather but
avoid overhead irrigation. Plant the tree in an area
which allows the leaves to stay as dry as possible.
Consult a local pathologist for the latest in control
measures. Cornus kousa is thought to be resistant to
anthracnose and it can be planted in areas where
anthracnose is a problem. It is a very beautiful tree.
Early symptoms of dogwood canker are smaller
and paler leaves than normal. Leaves on infected
branches are red earlier in the fall. At first the
symptoms appear only on the infected side of the tree
but become more general as the canker enlarges.
There is no chemical control for the disease. Avoid
trunk wounds during and after planting.
Crown canker is associated with wet soils and can
be controlled with appropriate fungicides.
Flower and leaf blight attacks fading bracts,
especially during wet weather. Infected flower parts
fall on the leaves spreading the infection.
A large number of leaf spots attack dogwood.
Clean up and dispose of infected leaves.
Powdery mildew covers the leaves with a fine
white coating.
Leaf scorch occurs during hot, dry, windy weather.
This condition looks like a disease. Scorch symptoms
are drying and browning of the leaf margins, or, in
more serious cases, drying and browning of the
interveinal area.