Fact Sheet ST-191
November 1993
Cornus kousa
Figure 1. Young Kousa Dogwood.
Kousa Dogwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Kousa Dogwood grows 15 to 20 feet tall and has
beautiful exfoliating bark, long lasting flowers, good
fall color, and attractive fruit (Fig. 1). Branches grow
upright when the tree is young, but appear in
horizontal layers on mature trees. The crown
eventually grows wider than it is tall on many
specimens. It would be difficult to use too many
Kousa Dogwoods. The white, pointed bracts are
produced a month later than Flowering Dogwood and
are effective for about a month, sometimes longer.
The red fruits are edible and they look like a big round
raspberry. Birds devour the fruit quickly. Fall color
varies from dull red to maroon.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cornus kousa
Pronunciation: KOR-nus KOO-suh
Common name(s): Kousa Dogwood, Chinese
Dogwood, Japanese Dogwood
Family: Cornaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; near a deck
or patio; screen; specimen
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-191, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cornus kousa -- Kousa Dogwood Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: bowed; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: purple; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; no significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Cornus kousa -- Kousa Dogwood Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Kousa Dogwood.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The bark is so attractive on Kousa Dogwood that
lower branches should be selectively thinned to show
it off. Although young trees show only limited bark
exfoliation, the tree shows its true bark character as it
gets older. The tree also makes a great silhouette as a
specimen planting and should be allowed to branch
close to the ground to enjoy its full character. The
strong horizontal branching habit on older plants is
difficult to find in other trees, and it looks great when
lit at night from beneath the canopy. Planting a Kousa
Dogwood can extend the spring flowering season
several weeks since it flowers just after Flowering
Dogwood.
Kousa Dogwood should be planted in place of
Cornus florida where Discula anthracnose is a
problem. It is not rated as an urban tough tree and
needs open soil space to look its best. Some shade
will improve performance in restricted soil spaces.
Growth is best on moist, loamy, well-drained soil
(not heavy clay) with mulch or leaf litter accumulated
over the roots. Kousa Dogwood is not particularly
drought- or heat-tolerant, requiring irrigation during
drought periods in summer. Sensitive to reflected heat
so it is poorly adapted to downtown landscapes. Best
in some shade in the southern part of its range.
Cultivars include: ‘Chinensis’ - larger bracts;
‘Milky Way’ - produces more flowers; the var.
angustata is evergreen as far north as Philadelphia.
Cornus florida x kousa hybrid ‘Constellation’ is new,
becoming available, and has wonderful flowers.
Pests
Several borers will attack dogwood. Try to keep
the trees healthy with regular fertilization. Indications
of borer problems are holes in the trunk, leaves
smaller than normal, and dieback of the crown.
Dogwood club gall midge causes galls at the
branch tips. The leaves on affected branch tips may
be distorted and the branch may fail to form a flower
bud. Prune out the galls as soon as they are seen.
Cornus kousa -- Kousa Dogwood Page 4
Leaf miners cause brown blister-like mines on the
undersides of leaves. The adult leaf miner
skeletonizes the leaves.
Scales can build up to large numbers before being
detected.
Aphids on small trees may be partially controlled
by spraying them with a strong stream of water from
the garden hose.
Diseases
Most of the diseases listed are seen most often on
Cornus florida. However other dogwoods are
susceptible to the diseases listed.
Early symptoms of dogwood canker are smaller
and paler leaves. Leaves on infected branches are red
earlier in the fall. At first the symptoms appear only
on the infected side of the tree but become more
general as the canker enlarges. There is no chemical
control for the disease. Avoid trunk wounds during
and after planting.
Crown canker is associated with wet soils and can
be controlled with appropriate fungicides.
Flower and leaf blight caused by Botrytis cinerea
attacks fading bracts, especially during wet weather.
Infected flower parts fall on the leaves spreading the
infection.
A large number of leaf spots attack dogwood.
Clean up and dispose of infected leaves.
Powdery mildew covers the leaves with a fine
white coating.
Leaf scorch occurs during hot, dry, windy weather.
This condition looks like a disease. Scorch symptoms
are drying and browning of the leaf margins, or, in
more serious cases, drying and browning of the
interveinal area.