Fact Sheet ST-193
November 1993
Cornus mas
Figure 1. Mature Cornelian-Cherry.
Cornelian-Cherry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Cornelian-Cherry is a slow-growing, small tree or
large shrub preferring sun or partial shade and a welldrained soil (Fig. 1). Flowers are produced in northern
areas but most of the south lacks the chilling hours
required to set flower buds. ‘Spring Glow’ is the one
cultivar which will flower in the south. The growth
rate is moderate and young plants transplant easily.
Bark is very showy and is often displayed by
removing lower foliage. A height of 15 to 25 feet and
spread of 12 to 18 feet can be expected, eventually.
The yellow flowers produced in very early spring are
similar to Forsythia and are followed by red fruit
which is edible and partially hidden by the foliage.
The fall color is red. Cornelian-Cherry responds well
to pruning and may be used as a hedge plant.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cornus mas
Pronunciation: KOR-nus mass
Common name(s): Cornelian-Cherry
Family: Cornaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; near
a deck or patio; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 12 to 18 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-193, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cornus mas -- Cornelian-Cherry Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: bowed; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Cornus mas -- Cornelian-Cherry Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Cornelian-Cherry.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The once popular species has fallen out of the
trade recently but deserves a comeback. It is pest free
and grows well on a variety of soil including clay.
Soil should be kept moist with good drainage.
Mulching encourages better root growth and moderate
drought tolerance. But not considered highly drought
tolerant by any means. Grows in sun to part shade.
Use it as a specimen or in a monoculture group
planting or shrub border. The fruit makes an excellent
tart jelly - also attracts birds. Makes an excellent patio
tree in the yard and should be planted more.
Several cultivars are listed but may not be readily
available: ‘Alba’ - white fruit; ‘Aureo-Elegantissima’ -
leaves bordered in yellow, green and pink;
‘Elegantissima’ - leaves yellow, green and pink;
‘Flava’ - yellow fruits; ‘Fructu Violaceo’ - purple
fruits; ‘Golden Glory’ had dark green foliage with a
dense, upright habit; ‘Macrocarpa’ - larger fruits;
‘Nana’ - dwarf, three feet tall, ‘Variegata’--leaves with
white variegations; ‘Xanthocarpa’ - yellow fruit. One
of the best for the southern United States is ‘Spring
Glow’ which has a low chilling requirement and
beautiful flowers, handsome, leathery foliage which
looks good until frost. Cornus officinalis would be a
better choice for the south if you can find it.
Pests
Several borers will attack dogwood. Try to keep
the trees healthy with regular fertilization. Indications
of borer problems are holes in the trunk, leaves
smaller than normal, and dieback of the crown.
Dogwood club gall midge causes galls at the
branch tips. The leaves on affected branch tips may
be distorted and the branch may fail to form a flower
bud. Prune out the galls as soon as they are seen.
Leaf miners cause brown blister-like mines on the
undersides of leaves. The adult leaf miner
skeletonizes the leaves.
Scales can build up to large numbers before being
detected. Horticultural oil will control overwintering
stages.
Aphids may be controlled by spraying them with a
strong stream of water from the garden hose.
Diseases
Most of the diseases listed are seen most often on
Cornus florida. However other dogwoods are
susceptible to the diseases listed.
Early symptoms of dogwood canker are smaller
and paler leaves. Leaves on infected branches are red
earlier in the fall. At first the symptoms appear only
on the infected side of the tree but become more
general as the canker enlarges. There is no chemical
control for the disease. Avoid trunk wounds during
and after planting.
Crown canker is associated with wet soils and can
be controlled with appropriate fungicides.
Flower and leaf blight caused by Botrytis cinerea
attacks fading bracts, especially during wet weather.
Infected flower parts fall on the leaves spreading the
infection.
A large number of leaf spots attack dogwood.
Clean up and dispose of infected leaves.
Powdery mildew covers the leaves with a fine
white coating.
Leaf scorch occurs during hot, dry, windy weather.
This condition looks like a disease. Scorch symptoms
Cornus mas -- Cornelian-Cherry Page 4
are drying and browning of the leaf margins, or, in
more serious cases, drying and browning of the
interveinal area.