Fact Sheet ST-200
November 1993
Corylus colurna
Figure 1. Middle-aged Turkish Filbert.
Turkish Filbert1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Turkish Hazel is a 40 to 50-foot-tall, occasionally
80-foot-tall (in its native habitat), deciduous tree with
a beautiful pyramidal shape, the thick, tan to grey,
short trunk supporting the dense horizontal branches
(Fig. 1). Growth rate is usually slow. Like many
trees with horizontal branches, the main limbs are
quite small in diameter in relationship to the typically
straight trunk, and arise at almost a 90-degree angle.
This should make the tree quite durable in urban areas
and helps maintain a symmetrical crown so prized by
landscape architects. The lush, dark green leaves are
five inches long and stay on the tree long into the fall,
finally turning a pale yellow/green before dropping,
but fall color is far from striking. Inconspicuous
female flowers and two to three-inch-long, attractive
male catkins are produced in early spring and are
followed by the production of clustered fruits which
are quite irresistible to squirrels. On some older trees,
the bark becomes ridged and corky, peeling off in
sections to expose the orange/brown bark beneath.
But this characteristic varies from one tree to the next.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Corylus colurna
Pronunciation: KOR-ih-lus koe-LER-nuh
Common name(s): Turkish Filbert, Turkish Hazel
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-200, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Corylus colurna -- Turkish Filbert Page 2
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Corylus colurna -- Turkish Filbert Page 3
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Turkish Filbert.
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Turkish Hazel makes a wonderful shade tree since
it produces very dense shade, and its narrow crown
and ability to withstand air-pollution make it wellsuited for use as a street tree in urban areas. It makes
a rather formal statement in the landscape due to the
tight, consistently-shaped, narrow crown. It is well
suited for areas which have restricted overhead
horizontal space for lateral branch development. Once
the central leader has been properly trained in the
nursery, the tree should require little if any pruning or
other maintenance once it is established. The nut may
be a slight litter problem for some, and considered
more unsightly than dangerous. Turkish Hazel is
susceptible to Japanese beetles which can defoliate
portions of the tree rather quickly but this should not
be cause to eliminate this very adaptable tree from
your recommended tree list.
Turkish Hazel is an extremely tolerant tree,
surviving hot summers, cold winters, wind, drought,
and heavy or alkaline soils with ease. Plants should
be located in full sun and, like most other trees,
watered regularly for several years after transplanting.
They are reportedly very difficult to transplant but
once established they then become quite droughttolerant and adaptable. Other trees scorch in summer
drought whereas this one will stay green. This tree
should enjoy a much wider use than it does now but
may need to be grown in containers, or under field
conditions which encourage root development inside
the root ball, to overcome poor transplant survival.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.