Fact Sheet ST-201
November 1993
Cotinus coggygria
Figure 1. Middle-aged Smoketree.
Smoketree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This slow growing, open-crowned, round, small
tree eventually reaches to 10 to 15 feet tall
(occasionally 20) and 10 to 15 feet wide (Fig. 1). The
large panicles of wispy cream-colored flowers
produced in spring and early summer give the effect of
a cloud of smoke. They make a wonderful accent in a
shrub border and can be planted as a specimen or as a
patio tree where the black, showy, multiple trunk can
be displayed. Planting Smoketree is a good way to
extend the spring flowering-tree season into the
summer before the Crape-Myrtles come into full
bloom. Fall color is usually good to excellent and
ranges from yellow to orange and brilliant red-purple.
Many people grow it simply to enjoy the vivid fall
color.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cotinus coggygria
Pronunciation: koe-TYE-nus koe-GUY-gree-uh
Common name(s): Smoketree, Wig-Tree, Smokebush
Family: Anacardiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; screen; trainable as a standard; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 10 to 18 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-201, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cotinus coggygria -- Smoketree Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: orange; purple; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Cotinus coggygria -- Smoketree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Smoketree.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree is tough and adapts to restricted soil
spaces. It could be used along a street under power
lines and would not require pruning for many years. It
is a small tree, well-adapted to urban areas with almost
year-round interest which should be used more in our
landscapes.
Smoketree grows best in a sunny location and a
well-drained loam. It will grow asymmetrically and
lean toward the light in a partially sunny area, so it is
best to locate it in full day sun where the crown will
develop symmetrically. Though sometimes short-lived
in rich soil, Smoketree is useful in dry, rocky soil
where there is no irrigation. It also grows in a wide
range of soil pH, including alkaline. It is probably
short-lived (20 years - maybe more) in most situations
but who cares - the tree is great while it’s around!
Propagation is by seed but there is considerable
variation in leaf color. Cutting propagation can be
accomplished in June or early July with IBA.
Cultivars include: ‘Daydream’ - heavy production
of panicles, dense habit of growth; ‘Flame’ - brilliant
orange-red fall color, pink inflorescences; ‘Nordine’ -
resembles ‘Royal Purple’; ‘Notcutt’s Variety’ - dark
maroon-purple leaves (also known as ‘Foliis Purpureis
Notcutt’s Variety’ and ‘Rubrifolius’); ‘Purpureus’ -
leaves bronze-green, inflorescences purplish-pink;
‘Royal Purple’ - leaves are darker purple than
‘Notcutt’s Variety’, rich red-purple fall color, purplishred inflorescences; ‘Pendulus’ - pendulous branches;
and ‘Velvet Cloak’ - dark purple-leaf form, spectacular
fall color of reddish-purple.
Pests
Oblique-banded leaf roller mines and rolls the
leaves, usually in June. The insect rarely occurs in
sufficient numbers to warrant control. When it does
occur they can be picked off by hand or sprayed with
Bacillus thuringiensis.
Diseases
Leaf spots can be caused by various genera of
fungi but are usually not serious.
Scab may cause leaf drop. No controls are listed.
The most serious disease is Verticillium wilt.
Smoketree is very susceptible, and entire branches wilt
and die. Prune out infected branches, fertilize, and
water the plant during dry weather.
A stem canker can be a problem in the eastern
U.S.