Fact Sheet ST-208
November 1993
Cotinus obovatus
Figure 1. Middle-aged American Smoketree.
American Smoketree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
American Smoketree is most often seen as a large
shrub 15 to 20 feet tall when grown in cultivation but
can slowly become a 20 to 30-foot-tall, rounded tree
with time, or in the wild (Fig. 1). The bark on older
specimens flakes off at the base of the trunk showing a
dark grey to black exfoliating character. Multiple
trunks eventually become twisted and gnarled. The 7
to 12-inch, fairly sparse, fuzzy panicles of springtime
flowers give the plant an unusual, somewhat smoky
effect but American Smoketree is most outstanding for
its beautiful foliage. The five to six-inch-long leaves
are pinkish-bronze when young, mature to a lush, dark
blue/green then, in autumn, change into gorgeous
shades of yellow, red, orange, or purple. Very striking
in the fall, one of the best for fall color since it lasts
three to four weeks. Enough cannot be said about the
fall color - it must be seen to be believed. Not seen
often enough in cultivation, American Smoketree may
be in danger of extinction in the wild due to the large
trees having been harvested for the yellow and orange
dye found in their wood.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cotinus obovatus
Pronunciation: koe-TYE-nus ob-oh-VAY-tus
Common name(s): American Smoketree,
Chittamwood
Family: Anacardiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; trainable as a standard; small parking lot islands
(< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet
wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential
street tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban
areas where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted
soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-208, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cotinus obovatus -- American Smoketree Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: orange; purple; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: pink
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Cotinus obovatus -- American Smoketree Page 3
Breakage: resistant
Figure 3. Foliage of American Smoketree.
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Smoketree is best used in a shrub border, or
trained as a multiple-trunked patio or accent tree. It
can be pruned to provide clearance beneath to allow
for pedestrians to pass or for use as a street tree. The
tree should be used more often in American
landscapes.
A North American native, American Smoketree is
tolerant of a wide range of adverse urban conditions -
wet soil, wind, drought, and compacted soil. Plants
grow well and are native to high pH, alkaline soil and
should be located in full sun or partial shade. Best
flowering, form, and overall attractiveness is achieved
in full sun. May need occasional irrigation on sandy
soil. It is reportedly difficult to transplant but this is
easily overcome by growing in containers.
The cultivar ‘Red Leaf’ is popular for its
especially brilliant fall color. Other cultivars selected
for consistent and superior fall color are likely to be
made available in the near future.
Propagation is by seed (with difficulty), cuttings,
or layering.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern, except
Verticillium wilt can kill trees if they become infected.