Fact Sheet ST-212
November 1993
Crataegus phaenopyrum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Washington Hawthorn.
Washington Hawthorn1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Washington Hawthorn grows 20 to 35 feet tall in a
wide pyramidal shape (Fig. 1). The tree has a rapid
growth rate when young, slowing with age. It is
tolerant of many different soil types. The small,
white, abundant flowers, produced in clusters in late
spring are followed by showy orange to red fruit that
persist into winter, if not eaten by birds. The fall leaf
color is orange to red and can be quite striking.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Crataegus phaenopyrum
Pronunciation: kruh-TEE-gus fee-no-PYE-rum
Common name(s): Washington Hawthorn
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; specimen; residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 35 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-212, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Crataegus phaenopyrum -- Washington Hawthorn Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; thorns are
present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Crataegus phaenopyrum -- Washington Hawthorn Page 3
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
Figure 3. Foliage of Washington Hawthorn.
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
With lower branches removed, this Hawthorn is
quite useful as a street tree where there will not be
heavy pedestrian traffic. The thorns are about three
inches long and contact with them can be painful.
Left unpruned it creates a nice specimen in a lawn
with lower branches persisting all the way to the
ground. This characteristic also makes it quite suitable
as a screen. The bright fruit makes a show in the fall
and winter which many people will comment on. Like
other Hawthorns, the major problem with the tree is
sensitivity to a large variety of insects and diseases.
Older trees are susceptible to splitting apart in ice
storms. Crotches with embedded bark are most
susceptible. Prune to a single trunk to help prevent
this problem.
The cultivar ‘Fastigiata’ has an upright growth
habit.
Pests
Aphids can be controlled with strong sprays of
water from a garden hose, if the colony is in the lower
branches. Sometimes the aphids themselves are not
seen but the distorted growth, honeydew on the leaves,
and sooty mold growing on the honeydew are obvious.
Borer attacks may be prevented if the trees are
kept in good vigor with regular fertilization.
Leaf miners symptoms are brown blotches on the
leaves.
Lace bugs can be a serious, though occasional,
problem. The insect feeding on the undersides of the
leaves causes chlorotic flecks on the upper leaf
surfaces. The lower sides of the leaves are covered
with small, brown, sticky flecks.
The pear slug skeletonizes Hawthorn leaves and
these sawfly larvae have a slimy appearance. A few
insects can be washed off with a garden hose.
Tent caterpillar nests can be pruned out while still
small. Sprays of Bacillus thuringiensis may be used.
Do not burn nests while the nests are in the tree. The
injury from the fire may exceed that caused by the
insects.
Scales may be controlled with horticultural oil
sprays.
Spider mites are so small they can cause much
foliage discoloration before being detected.
Diseases
Fire blight: This disease can be severe in some
parts of the country. The first noticeable symptom of
fire blight is the browning of branch tips. The tips
appear to be burned or scorched and the dead, brown
leaves droop but hang on the tree. Cankers form and
the bacteria is washed farther down the branch by rain.
The bacteria, Erwinia amylovora, are spread from
diseased to healthy twigs by rain, bees, and other
mechanical means. There is no satisfactory chemical
control. The disease is less of a problem if trees are
not located near apple or pear orchards. Prune out
blighted branch tips by cutting a foot or two beyond
the diseased wood. Over-fertilizing with nitrogen
fertilizer may increase tree susceptibility to fire blight.
Leaf blight attacks most Hawthorns but especially
English Hawthorn. The symptoms are small reddish
brown spots on the leaves which may run together.
Infected leaves drop in August and severely infected
trees may be completely bare.
Cedar Hawthorn rust causes orange or rust colored
spots on the leaves leading to early defoliation. The
fruits and twigs are also attacked. Juniper is an
alternate host. Cedar-quince rust attacks fruits.
Washington, Lavelle and Cockspur Hawthorn are
resistant to rust diseases.
Crataegus phaenopyrum -- Washington Hawthorn Page 4
Scab causes leaf spotting and defoliation. The
fruit have black raised spots on them.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery growth
on the leaves.