Fact Sheet ST-215
November 1993
Crataegus x lavallei
Figure 1. Middle-aged Lavalle Hawthorn.
Lavalle Hawthorn1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This Hawthorn grows asymmetrically 20 to 30 feet
tall and spreads 10 to 25 feet (Fig. 1). The tree has
lustrous foliage and fewer thorns than some other
Hawthorns. The flowers are white, large, and borne in
spring. The fruit are borne in bright orange-red
clusters and they are marked with brown and persist
until spring. The fall color is bronze red. It is an all
around attractive tree providing interest throughout the
year.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Crataegus x lavallei
Pronunciation: kruh-TEE-gus x luh-VALE-ee-eye
Common name(s): Lavalle Hawthorn
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-215, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Crataegus x lavallei -- Lavalle Hawthorn Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; thorns are
present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
Crataegus x lavallei -- Lavalle Hawthorn Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Lavalle Hawthorn.
The tree is used extensively as a street tree in
some areas of the country because they are tough. It
is an excellent garden shrub border plant, providing a
refreshing white bloom in spring, fall color, and
attractive fruit. Specify tree-form when planting along
the street.
Pests
Aphids can be partially controlled with strong
sprays of water from a garden hose, if the colony is in
the lower branches. Sometimes the aphids themselves
are not seen but the distorted growth, honeydew on the
leaves, and sooty mold growing on the honeydew are
obvious.
Borer attacks may be prevented if the trees are
kept in good vigor with regular fertilization.
Leaf miners symptoms are brown blotches on the
leaves.
Lace bugs can be a serious, though occasional,
problem. The insect feeding on the undersides of the
leaves causes chlorotic flecks on the upper leaf
surfaces. The lower sides of the leaves are covered
with small, brown, sticky flecks.
The pear slug skeletonizes Hawthorn leaves and
these sawfly larvae have a slimy appearance. A few
insects can be washed off with a garden hose.
Tent caterpillar nests can be pruned out while still
small. Sprays of Bacillus thuringiensis may be used.
Do not burn nests while the nests are in the tree. The
injury from the fire may exceed that caused by the
insects.
Overwintering scales can usually be controlled
with horticultural oil sprays.
Spider mites are so small they can cause much
foliage discoloration before being detected.
Diseases
Fire blight: This disease can be severe in some
parts of the country. The first noticeable symptom of
fire blight is the browning of branch tips. The tips
appear to be burned or scorched and the dead, brown
leaves droop but hang on the tree. Cankers form and
the bacteria is washed farther down the branch by rain.
The bacteria are spread from diseased to healthy twigs
by bees and contaminated pruning tools. There is no
satisfactory chemical control. The disease is less of a
problem if trees are not located near apple or pear
orchards. Prune out blighted branch tips by cutting a
foot or two beyond the diseased wood. Overfertilizing with nitrogen fertilizer may increase tree
susceptibility to fire blight.
Leaf blight attacks most Hawthorns but especially
English Hawthorn. The symptoms are small reddish
brown spots on the leaves which may run together.
Infected leaves drop in August and severely infected
trees may be completely bare.
Cedar Hawthorn rust causes orange or rust colored
spots on the leaves leading to early defoliation. The
fruits and twigs are also attacked. Juniper is an
alternate host. Cedar-quince rust attacks fruits.
Washington, Lavelle and Cockspur Hawthorn are
resistant to rust diseases.
Scab causes leaf spotting and defoliation. The
fruit have black raised spots on them.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery growth
on the leaves.