Fact Sheet ST-214
November 1993
Crataegus viridis ‘Winter King’
Figure 1. Middle-aged ‘Winter King’ Southern Hawthorn.
‘Winter King’ Southern Hawthorn1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
‘Winter King’ Southern Hawthorn is a North
American native tree which slowly reaches 20 to 30
feet in height and spread (Fig. 1). It is very dense and
thorny which makes it a popular choice for use as a
hedge or as a screen. Unlike other Hawthorns, the
thorns are small and inconspicuous. The dark green,
deciduous leaves turn beautiful shades of bronze, red,
and gold in the fall before dropping. The handsome,
silver-grey bark peels off in sections to reveal the
inner orange bark, making ‘Winter King’ Southern
Hawthorn a striking specimen planting in the winter
landscape. The white blooms are followed by large,
orange/red fruits which persist on the naked tree
throughout the winter, adding to its landscape interest.
The tree was originally selected for the outstanding
winter berry color. The original tree from which the
cultivar was selected is about 100 years old and 25
feet tall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Crataegus viridis ‘Winter King’
Pronunciation: kruh-TEE-gus VEER-ih-diss
Common name(s): ‘Winter King’ Southern
Hawthorn, ‘Winter King’ Green Hawthorn
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); reclamation plant; screen;
small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size);
narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-214, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Crataegus viridis ‘Winter King’ -- ‘Winter King’ Southern Hawthorn Page 2
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; thorns are
present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium
Crataegus viridis ‘Winter King’ -- ‘Winter King’ Southern Hawthorn Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of ‘Winter King’ Southern Hawthorn.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The multiple trunks and wide pyramidal to
rounded shape make this adaptable tree well suited for
the low maintenance landscape as a specimen. If
lower branches are removed from the trunks, a more
vase shape can be maintained. It has become quite
popular and is available in many areas.
‘Winter King’ Southern Hawthorn should be
grown in full sun on well-drained soil. It is a very
adaptable tree well suited for the urban landscape.
The short thorns are usually not a problem, even on
trees planted near streets. It is among the best of the
many Hawthorns that are available, receiving the
Pennsylvania Horticultural Society’s 1992 Styer Gold
Medal Award.
Transplant in the spring for best establishment.
Propagation is by grafting.
Pests
Problem pests are aphids, borers, caterpillars, and
leaf miners
Diseases
It is susceptible to cedar-hawthorn rust but is more
resistant than the species.