Fact Sheet ST-216
November 1993
Crescentia cujete
Figure 1. Middle-aged Calabash-Tree.
Calabash-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Calabash is an evergreen tree reaching 20 to 30
feet in height with a broad, irregular crown composed
of long, spreading branches clothed in two to six-inchlong bright green leaves, which create moderate shade
beneath the tree (Fig. 1). Calabash is most outstanding
in the landscape for its year-round production of
flowers and fruit, both of which are unusual. The twoinch-wide flowers are yellow/green with red or purple
veins, cup-shaped, and appear to emerge directly from
the branches. These are followed by the emergence of
the large, round fruit, 5 to 12 inches in diameter, with
a smooth, hard shell, which hang directly beneath the
branches. Fruits are poisonous.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Crescentia cujete
Pronunciation: kress-EN-tee-uh koo-JEE-tee
Common name(s): Calabash-Tree
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-216, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Crescentia cujete -- Calabash-Tree Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; unpleasant fragrance;
year round flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Crescentia cujete -- Calabash-Tree Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Calabash-Tree.
Calabash tree should be grown in full sun on any
well-drained soil.
The main limbs on Calabash originate close to the
ground forming a low-branched tree without training
or pruning. These limbs branch infrequently, forming
a heavy, awkward-looking canopy. This is suitable for
planting in an open area where there is plenty of
space. Prune the tips of the branches regularly when
the tree is young to develop more secondary branches
close to the trunk. This will help increase the
diameter of the main branches and thicken the canopy.
The trunk can be trained straight by staking, and
lateral branches directed to grow upright.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
occasionally bothered by Chinese rose beetles and a
leaf-webbing caterpillar.