Fact Sheet ST-217
November 1993
Cryptomeria japonica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Japanese-Cedar.
Japanese-Cedar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The tree keeps a billowy pyramidal form on one
central trunk until close to maturity when the crown
opens up into an irregular, narrow oval (Fig. 1). It
will reach a height of about 50 feet and spread about
20 feet. Old specimens can develop trunks to three
feet in diameter. The reddish brown bark is
ornamental, peeling off in long strips, and is the most
pronounced characteristic on old trees. The foliage
will become bronzed during the winter but greens up
again in spring. Branches usually persist on the tree
with old specimens branched to the ground.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cryptomeria japonica
Pronunciation: krip-toe-MEER-ee-uh
juh-PAWN-ih-kuh
Common name(s): Japanese-Cedar
Family: Taxodiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; screen;
small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size);
specimen; residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-217, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cryptomeria japonica -- Japanese-Cedar Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: awl-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; should be grown with a
single leader; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Cryptomeria japonica -- Japanese-Cedar Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese-Cedar.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Provide an acid soil and protection from winter
winds. Locate the tree so air circulation is good,
particularly during summer to help prevent leaf blight.
Best with afternoon shade in southern part of its range.
A number of cultivars are available varying in growth
habit and ability to hold green foliage color in the
winter. Cryptomeria is tolerant of compacted soil and
performs well in parking lots and other tough, urban
sites with some irrigation in drought. It makes a
wonderful accent, screen, or border tree for larger
properties. It may grow too large for most residential
landscapes. They can be planted as street trees 10 feet
back from the street in residential areas to provide an
elegant flavor to the neighborhood.
Propagation is by cuttings which root slowly or by
seed which germinates slowly.
‘Yoshino’ holds green foliage color in the winter.
‘Elegans’ grows to 15 feet tall.
Pests
Mites can infest the foliage.
Diseases
Leaf blight and leaf spot are two problems. Leaf
blight often causes much of the interior foliage to
brown, creating an unsightly specimen. Fungicide
sprays help prevent the disease, as does placing the
tree so it receives early morning sun to dry the foliage.
Keep the foliage as dry as possible.