Fact Sheet ST-220
November 1993
Cunninghamia lanceolata
Figure 1. Young China-Fir.
China-Fir1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
China-Fir is an evergreen which is usually seen
from 30 to 75 feet in height with a spread of 10 to 30
feet (Fig. 1). The strong, heavy trunk stands straight
up at the base of the coarse, irregular, pyramidal form
which is composed of somewhat pendulous branches
densely clothed in 1.5 to 2.5-inch-long, bright green,
pointed needles. It is somewhat reminiscent of some
of the spruces like Blue and White Spruce.
Occasionally the tree will be grown with several trunks
arising from the soil, but above that point the trunk
almost never branches into a double or multiple leader,
growing up the center of the tree like an arrow and
lending a strong vertical accent to any area. The
crown is fairly open allowing the trunk and large
branches to show prominently. Like other tall-growing
trees, it is best to maintain only one central trunk. The
leaves take on a bronze hue in autumn and, when they
die, persist on the tree on interior branches for many
years giving it a somewhat unkempt appearance
according to some horticulturists. The attractive,
brown, peeling bark strips away to reveal the inner
reddish bark, adding to the tree’s overall textural
interest.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cunninghamia lanceolata
Pronunciation: kunn-ning-HAM-ee-uh
lan-see-oh-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): China-Fir
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
screen; specimen; tree has been successfully grown in
urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-220, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cunninghamia lanceolata -- China-Fir Page 2
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 75 feet
Spread: 15 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: ciliate
Leaf shape: lanceolate
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Cunninghamia lanceolata -- China-Fir Page 3
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of China-Fir.
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
China-Fir is best used as a specimen, at the corner
of a large building, or as a large-scale screen planted
15 to 20 feet apart. Young specimens maintain a
fairly tight crown but they open up with age,
becoming asymmetrical with large pieces of the crown
missing. It works well in oriental gardens and the
foliage keeps well indoors in a vase of water. Not a
tree you would use everywhere, China-Fir has its place
as an occasional accent and conversation piece,
particularly in a park or on a golf course. It is too big
for a residential landscape but useful on campuses and
other large-scale landscapes.
China-Fir should be grown in full sun or partial
shade (will grow in shade but with poor, open form)
on moist, well-drained, acid soil. Although the leaves
may be damaged by severe frosts, they are quickly
replaced in springtime. China-Fir is extremely drought
tolerant and grows well in poor, compacted clay soil.
It is very adapted to urban soils except those poorly
drained.
The cultivar ‘Glauca’ has blue/green foliage.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Brown
foliage stays on the interior branches but this is a
normal condition, usually not caused by insects or
disease.