Fact Sheet ST-221
November 1993
Cupaniopsis anacardiopsis
Figure 1. Mature Carrotwood.
Carrotwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This compact, single-trunked, evergreen tree has
four-inch-long, glossy, dark green, divided leaflets and
makes an ideal shade, specimen, patio or poolside tree
(Fig. 1). It is popular in many yards and is used as a
small to medium-sized street tree spaced about 20 feet
apart. The insignificant small lime-green flowers are
followed by 1/2-inch diameter, green fruits which split
open to reveal seeds but do not squash or stain. The
seeds germinate in the landscape and may be a litter
problem. There have been some reports of carrotwood
becoming invasive along coastal islands of Florida so
use caution in planting in these areas. In addition, the
seeds may be disseminated by birds which would
make it easy for the tree to spread rapidly into native
hammocks.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cupaniopsis anacardiopsis
Pronunciation: koo-pan-nee-OP-sis
an-nuh-kar-dee-OP-sis
Common name(s): Carrotwood
Family: Sapindaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: not recommended for planting
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire; undulate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-221, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cupaniopsis anacardiopsis -- Carrotwood Page 2
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; orange
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; showy trunk; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
Cupaniopsis anacardiopsis -- Carrotwood Page 3
trunk, or winter flowers
Figure 3. Foliage of Carrotwood.
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Carrotwood tolerates poor, dry or wet soils, full
sun, and hot, salty winds. It is truly a durable, urbantolerant tree, able to grow even in confined planting
pits in downtown sidewalks. Perhaps it is best used in
these areas. It is deep-rooting on well-drained soils
and will tolerate drought. Selected, upright branches
in the crown can be removed to allow for more light
penetration and better turf growth under the crown. If
not, the dense canopy will shade out all but the most
shade-tolerant plants. The wood is bright apricotcolored in cross-section, and resists breakage because
it is hard. If you cut one down, save the wood.
Wood-workers enjoy turning it on a lathe and making
spindles and bowls.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Warning: Use with caution since the tree has become
invasive in south Florida. Commonly used as a street
tree in southern California.