Fact Sheet ST-222
November 1993
Cupressus arizonica var. arizonica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Arizona Cypress.
Arizona Cypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This rapidly-growing North American native
evergreen reaches 30 to 40 feet in height with a 15 to
25-foot-spread (Fig. 1). It is referred to as Cupressus
glabra by some botanists. The green foliage has a
silver/gray shimmer and the branches are more open
than most other species of juniper. The inconspicuous
flowers are followed by small, one-inch cones which
persist on the tree. The peeling brown bark becomes
gray with age. Arizona Cypress is often used as a
specimen or windbreak planting and is a common sight
in west Texas and the southern High Plains where it
tolerates the hot, dry conditions with ease.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cupressus arizonica var. arizonica
Pronunciation: koo-PRESS-us air-ih-ZAWN-ih-kuh
variety air-ih-ZAWN-ih-kuh
Common name(s): Arizona Cypress
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: screen; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-222, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cupressus arizonica var. arizonica -- Arizona Cypress Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Cupressus arizonica var. arizonica -- Arizona Cypress Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Arizona Cypress.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It can be found growing with a single trunk or in
clumps. It is probably best used in landscapes which
are not irrigated since it is susceptible to Juniper
blight. Many locations in the eastern part of the
country are too humid to successfully grow this tree.
It is most often found in the west and in the drier parts
of Texas and Oklahoma.
Arizona Cypress should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil. Although it will tolerate clay soil,
the shallow roots will not gain as secure an anchor as
they might in other soils and the tree may, as a result,
topple over during wind and rainstorms.
Cultivars of Cupressus arizonica include:
‘Compacta’, low, conical; ‘Gareei’, silver blue foliage;
‘Glauca’, leaves silvery-grey; ‘Greenwood’, medium
silver/grey/green; ‘Oblonga’, horizontal branches,
producing oblong effect, leaves grey/green;
‘Verhalenii’, leaves bright glaucous-blue, softer and
more graceful than wild forms; ‘Watersii’, narrowly
pyramidal, compact.
Propagation is by seed or grafting.
Pests
Bagworms.
Diseases
Juniper blight, especially in cool, humid regions.
A stem canker has devastated large numbers of
trees in various parts of the country.