Fact Sheet ST-223
November 1993
Cupressus glabra ‘Carolina Safire’
Figure 1. Young Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress.
Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The species is a native of the American southwest,
and is densely clothed in blue/grey leaves and
becomes a narrow pyramid, perhaps reaching 50 to 70
feet tall (Fig. 1). Exceptionally tolerant of hot, dry
conditions, Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress is ideal
for use as a screen, hedge, or windbreak. The outer
red/brown bark breaks off every year, revealing the
fresh, new, bright red, smooth inner bark. Foliage of
‘Carolina Safire’ is one of the brightest blues you will
ever see. Jump out of the way after planting this
cultivar since it springs out of the ground, with young
trees growing about six feet each year with irrigation.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cupressus glabra ‘Carolina Safire’
Pronunciation: koo-PRESS-us GLAY-bruh
Common name(s): Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; screen; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 70 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-223, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cupressus glabra ‘Carolina Safire’ -- Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Cupressus glabra ‘Carolina Safire’ -- Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress Page 3
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
Figure 3. Foliage of Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress.
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress should be grown
in full sun on well-drained, acid or alkaline soil. If
grown with too much moisture or on a poorly-drained
clay, a shallow root system will develop making the
tree susceptible to wind damage. The species was
once widely grown in the southeastern U.S. but may
perform best in the drier parts of the southwest,
including west Texas and Oklahoma.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
A stem canker has devastated large numbers of
Smooth-Barked Arizona Cypress in various parts of
the country.