Fact Sheet ST-224
November 1993
Cupressus macrocarpa
Figure 1. Middle-aged Monterey Cypress.
Monterey Cypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Monterey cypress thrive near the sea on the west
coast of the United States, where it is native to the
Monterey Bay, California, area (Fig. 1). It has a high
wind tolerance, becoming increasingly more attractive
under heavy wind conditions. Narrow and
pyramid-shaped when young, Monterey cypress
spreads with age, and can become 70 to 90 feet in
height. It is one of the major trees planted to hold the
sands in Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, but
unfortunately many are dying. The plant is only
grown in the western states.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Cupressus macrocarpa
Pronunciation: koo-PRESS-us mack-roe-KAR-puh
Common name(s): Monterey Cypress
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: not recommended for planting
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 70 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-224, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Cupressus macrocarpa -- Monterey Cypress Page 2
Leaf shape: scale-like
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Cupressus macrocarpa -- Monterey Cypress Page 3
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Cypresses can be grown from seeds sown in
sandy, peaty soil or from summer cuttings in a humid
greenhouse under mist.
Pests
Cypresses may be infested with aphids,
mealybugs, caterpillars, and scale insects. All can be
controlled by washing with soap solution or with
appropriate chemical spray.
Diseases
This tree is susceptible to coryneum canker
fungus, for which there is no cure. Control of cankers
consists chiefly in cutting out and burning affected
parts. Badly infected trees may require complete
removal.