Fact Sheet ST-230
November 1993
Diospyros texana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Texas Persimmon.
Texas Persimmon1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This slow-growing, native North American tree
reaches a height of 20 to 40 feet with an equal width
(usually smaller) and is deciduous from USDA
hardiness zone 8 northward, remaining evergreen in its
southern range (Fig. 1). The one to 2-inch-long, dark
green, leathery leaves are slightly fuzzy underneath.
The bark of Texas Persimmon is particularly striking,
the smooth outside layers of gray, white, and pink
peeling off in beautiful layers. Branches ascend into
the crown in a twisted fashion unlike most other trees.
The inconspicuous, green/white flowers are followed
by the production of small, one-inch black fruits
which, although edible to man, contain an unappealing
number of seeds. However, these fruits are quite
popular with birds and other wildlife who relish the
sweet, juicy flesh. In Mexico, the fruits are used to
make a black dye.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Diospyros texana
Pronunciation: dye-OSS-pih-ross teck-SAY-nuh
Common name(s): Texas Persimmon
Family: Ebenaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking
lot islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: upright; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-230, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Diospyros texana -- Texas Persimmon Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk;
tree wants to grow with several trunks but can be
trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Diospyros texana -- Texas Persimmon Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Texas Persimmon.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Multiple trunks ascend into the vase-shaped crown
forming a tree with a shape and structure similar to
crape myrtle. Use it as an accent planted in a low
ground cover to display the muscular looking bark. It
is well suited for planting in a highway median or
along a street with overhead power lines due to its
small stature. Except for the small, black fruits which
drop for a short period of time, this is a clean tree
which could be planted more often in the urban
landscape. It is very well adapted for residential
landscapes, having tolerated extended periods of
drought and neglect. Plant it in a prominent location
to display the striking habit.
Texas Persimmon should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soils and is often found on alkaline sites.
It is especially tolerant of drought and neglect and
should need only occasional fertilization every year or
two.
Propagation is by seed. Seedling trees will begin
flowering within five to six-years but it will take
approximately 10-years for the flaking bark to appear.
Pests and Diseases
It has few pests or diseases, none normally
serious.