Fact Sheet ST-229
November 1993
Diospyros kaki
Figure 1. Young Japanese Persimmon.
Japanese Persimmon1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Persimmon is a species related to
Common Persimmon (Diospyros virginiana), but is
native to Asia (China, Japan) (Fig. 1). It can grow to
about 30 feet when mature. This is an excellent fruit
tree for ornamental use and makes an excellent
specimen. The tree is a sight to behold when leaves
have fallen in autumn, displaying the bright yelloworange fruits throughout the canopy. Similar to
Common Persimmon, its preference is for a moist,
well-drained soil in full sun locations. The tree has
good drought tolerance. Japanese Persimmon develops
an attractive red fall color, but the two to four-inchdiameter fruits can be a big mess when they fall from
the tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Diospyros kaki
Pronunciation: dye-OSS-pih-ross KACK-eye
Common name(s): Japanese Persimmon
Family: Ebenaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; fruit tree;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; upright
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-229, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Diospyros kaki -- Japanese Persimmon Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Diospyros kaki -- Japanese Persimmon Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Persimmon.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Certainly not a street or parking lot tree, Japanese
Persimmon is probably best located as an occasional
specimen where it can be viewed from a distance,
away from walks. This will ensure that the fruit will
drop on the lawn, not on a walk. Better yet, plant the
tree in a loose, low-growing groundcover so dropping
fruit will be hidden from view in the foliage of the
groundcover.
Some non-astringent cultivars have been selected
and could be available locally.
Pests and Diseases
A trouble-free tree, but messy in fruit.