Fact Sheet ST-231
November 1993
Diospyros virginiana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Common Persimmon.
Common Persimmon1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
An excellent small to medium tree, Common
Persimmon is an interesting, somewhat irregularlyshaped native tree, for possible naturalizing in yards or
parks (Fig. 1). Bark is grey or black and distinctly
blocky with orange in the valleys between the blocks.
Fall color can be a spectacular red in USDA hardiness
zones 4 through 8a. It is well adapted to cities, but
presents a problem with fruit litter, attracting flies and
scavengers, such as opossums and other mammals. Its
mature height can be 60 feet, with branches spreading
from 20 to 35 feet and a trunk two feet thick, but it is
commonly much shorter in landscapes. The trunk
typically ascends up through the crown in a curved but
very dominant fashion, rarely producing double or
multiple leaders. Lateral branches are typically much
smaller in diameter than the trunk.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Diospyros virginiana
Pronunciation: dye-OSS-pih-ross
ver-jin-nee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Common Persimmon
Family: Ebenaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; fruit tree; recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; specimen; tree has
been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 20 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-231, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Diospyros virginiana -- Common Persimmon Page 2
Growth rate: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.79
Diospyros virginiana -- Common Persimmon Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Common Persimmon.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Common Persimmon prefers moist, well-drained,
bottomland or sandy soils but is also very droughtand urban-tolerant. Truly an amazing tree in its
adaptability to about any site conditions, including
alkaline soil. It is seen colonizing old fields as a
volunteer tree but grows slowly on dry sites. Its fruit
is an edible berry that usually ripens after frost,
although some cultivars do not require the frost
treatment to ripen. Before ripening, however, the fruit
is decidedly astringent and not edible. Most American
cultivars require both male and female trees for proper
fruiting.
Except for cleaning up the messy fruit if it falls on
a patio or sidewalk, Common Persimmon maintenance
is quite easy and it could be planted more. Locate it
where the slimy fruit will not fall on sidewalks and
cause people to slip and fall. Because transplantation
is difficult due to a coarsely-branched root system,
Persimmon trees should be balled and burlapped when
young or planted from containers. The wood is used
for golf club heads and is very hard and almost black.
The variety pubescens has fuzzy leaves and twigs.
Pests
No serious pests, except occasionally caterpillars.
Diseases
Common Persimmon is troubled by a leaf-spot
disease that may limit its use in the South. This
disease causes black spots on the leaves and premature
defoliation, sometimes in August in the north,
September in the south. It will not kill the tree but the
litter from early defoliation may be objectionable.
It is also susceptible to a vascular wilt which can
be devastating to established trees.