Fact Sheet ST-232
November 1993
Dombeya wallichii
Figure 1. Mature Pinkball.
Pinkball1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Nothing could be more attention-getting than
Pinkball when in full bloom (Fig. 1). Huge, pendent
clusters of tightly-packed, five to six-inch-diameter,
pink flowers give much the impression of upsidedown
corsages intermixed with large, coarsely-textured, light
green leaves. Pinkball maintains a rounded form and
can grow to 20 feet in height with an equal spread and
makes a spectacular specimen planting or patio tree. It
is usually grown as a shrub.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Dombeya wallichii
Pronunciation: dom-BEE-yuh wall-ICK-ee-eye
Common name(s): Pinkball
Family: Sterculiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: near a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrate
Leaf shape: cordate
Leaf venation: pinnate; palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-232, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Dombeya wallichii -- Pinkball Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: pink
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing rapidly in full sun to partial shade on a
wide variety of soils, Pinkball needs protection from
frost and is not salt-tolerant. Flower heads fall from
the tree, remaining pink for a number of days. The
dried flower heads will need to be cleaned up for a
neat appearance beneath the tree but otherwise it is a
Dombeya wallichii -- Pinkball Page 3
very low-maintenance tree. Plants can be watered
Figure 3. Foliage of Pinkball.
until established and then forgotten except in the driest
locations.
There are several hybrids available.
Propagation is by softwood cuttings which root
quickly and easily.
Pests
Aphids, soft scale, nematodes, and sooty mold are
minor problems for Pinkball.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.