Fact Sheet ST-233
November 1993
Elaeagnus angustifolia
Figure 1. Middle-aged Russian-Olive.
Russian-Olive1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Russian-Olive grows in an open, somewhat
irregular globe shape 15 to 20 feet tall and wide
(occasionally larger) and has silvery gray-colored
foliage (Fig. 1). It has a rapid growth rate when
young becoming moderate with age. Shaping and
training the leader and major branches is needed to
develop a well-formed tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Elaeagnus angustifolia
Pronunciation: eel-ee-AG-nus
an-gus-tih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Russian-Olive, Oleaster
Family: Elaeagnaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); medium-sized parking lot islands
(100-200 square feet in size); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; screen; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; spreading
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: silver
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-233, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Elaeagnus angustifolia -- Russian-Olive Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; thorns are present on the trunk or
branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
Elaeagnus angustifolia -- Russian-Olive Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Russian-Olive.
This thorny tree transplants well but susceptibility
to canker diseases and verticillium wilt make it
undesirable for large scale landscape plantings,
particularly in the moist, eastern climate. But used as
an occasional accent, the tree attracts attention due to
the color of the foliage. It is commonly planted in the
drier parts of the country and performs well due to
drought tolerance and drier soil. It has escaped
cultivation on the panhandle of Texas and Oklahoma
along stream banks. Plant in the area of the landscape
with the best drainage. Although often short-lived, it
can add color to the landscape and can be planted due
to extreme tolerance to tough sites and poor soils.
This tough tree fixes its own nitrogen and prefers
a sunny location and is tolerant of alkaline soil,
drought, and coastal conditions including salty soil. It
probably is better suited for dry climates than the
moist climate typical of the eastern United States. It is
well suited to central and western Texas, even in
heavy clay, but with good surface drainage.
Pests
Few insects bother elaeagnus. The most likely
insect problem may be an infestation by one of the
scale insects. Use horticultural oil for some control.
Diseases
Several fungi cause leaf spots on Russian-Olive
but are not serious enough to warrant chemical control.
Several canker diseases attack the branches and
trunk, particularly in the humid east. The leaves on
infected branches turn brown and persist on the tree.
Usually, only the branch tip is affected.
Elaeagnus is often killed by verticillium wilt in the
east in wet areas or poorly drained sites. The disease
causes wilting and browning of leaves on affected
branches. Fertilize infected trees and prune out dead
branches. The disease is usually fatal and has affected
many plantings in the mid-west.