Fact Sheet ST-234
November 1993
Eriobotrya deflexa
Figure 1. Young Bronze Loquat.
Bronze Loquat1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This rounded, spreading, evergreen, small tree
reaches a height of 15 to 20 feet with a 10 to 15-foot
spread in a sunny spot (Fig. 1). Taller trees can be
found in partially shaded sites where the tree reaches
skyward for light. The large, eight-inch-long leaves
are a bright red-bronze or coppery color when young
and maintain this color for a considerable period of
time but eventually turn dark green. The small white,
fragrant flowers are produced on terminal panicles in
spring and are followed by small, inedible fruits.
Bronze Loquat can be espaliered, grown in patio
containers, or used as a specimen. Although shrubby
with a tight, compact, dense crown, it can easily be
trained into a small tree form and used for a small
shade tree near a deck or patio.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Eriobotrya deflexa
Pronunciation: air-ee-oh-BOT-ree-uh
dee-FLECK-suh
Common name(s): Bronze Loquat
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
hedge; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; screen; trainable
as a standard; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 10 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-234, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Eriobotrya deflexa -- Bronze Loquat Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: dentate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Eriobotrya deflexa -- Bronze Loquat Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Bronze Loquat.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Its neat habit and compact growth make Loquat an
ideal specimen or patio shade tree, and it can be used
as a residential street tree or median strip tree in areas
where overhead space is limited. But an adequate
clear trunk needs to be developed early in the life of
the tree to provide for vehicle clearance. Branches
will have to be pruned to grow up, as they tend to
droop with time under the weight of the developing
branch. It is not suited for planting next to the street
if trucks pass close to the tree since adequate clearance
is not possible but it is successful in wide median
strips. It also blends well into informal shrubbery
borders and the fruit is attractive to wildlife. It
espaliers well against a sunny wall, and makes a good
screen due to its dense canopy. Sprouts along the
trunk can be a maintenance nuisance.
Providing best fruit and form when grown in full
sun, Loquat can tolerate partial shade and a variety of
well-drained soils. It grows well on soils with a high
pH and maintains the characteristic dark green foliage.
Clay soil is acceptable as long as there is sufficient
slope to allow surface water to run away from the root
system. It often looks best in the southern portion of
its range when given some shade in the afternoon,
especially if it is not irrigated. Loquat should be wellwatered until established, but can then survive periodic
droughts. Do not overfertilize since this could
increase sensitivity to fire blight disease. Loquat may
live only 20 to 30-years so it should not be considered
a permanent fixture in the landscape. It performs well
along the coast with some protection from salty air.
The cultivar ‘Bronze Improved’ has bronzecolored new growth and grows 20 feet tall with a 15-
foot spread.
Propagation is by seed.
Diseases and insects
This tree is usually pest-free
Two common problems are fireblight and root rot
on wet soils. To reduce fireblight problems, provide
good air circulation and keep away from other
fireblight hosts, such as Pyracantha, pears, etc. If
leaves and stems blacken from the top downward,
prune back one-foot or more into healthy wood.
Sterilize shears between cuts.