Fact Sheet ST-238
November 1993
Erythrina variegata var. orientalis
Figure 1. Mature Coral Tree.
Coral Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This fast-growing, 50 feet tall and wide deciduous
tree with green and yellow-variegated, six-inch-long
leaves creates a broad canopy but has spiny branches
(Fig. 1). In spring, before the leaves appear, Coral
Tree is decorated with showy red blossoms, each
flower 2.5 inches long and arranged in dense, six-inchlong racemes. These blooms are followed by 12-inchlong, red/brown seedpods which contain poisonous
seeds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Erythrina variegata var. orientalis
Pronunciation: air-rith-RYE-nuh
vair-ee-eh-GAY-tuh variety or-ee-en-TAY-liss
Common name(s): Coral Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound; trifoliate
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: deltoid; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-238, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Erythrina variegata var. orientalis -- Coral Tree Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk;
thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: stout; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
Erythrina variegata var. orientalis -- Coral Tree Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Coral Tree.
The large size of Coral Tree makes it suited for
planting in parks, golf courses and in other large-scale
landscapes. Multiple trunks ascend from the lower
portion of the main trunk giving rise to a widespreading canopy casting dense shade. Lower
branches droop to the ground if they are allowed to
remain on the tree. Give this tree plenty of room to
develop since the canopy is large and the tree looks
wonderful with a symmetrical crown. Since the trunk
often flares or buttresses at the base, plant it at least
10 feet from a sidewalk or driveway.
Coral Tree should be grown in full sun on welldrained soil. Trees are highly drought-tolerant and
moderately salt-tolerant.
Propagation is easily done by seeds, cuttings, or
division.
Pests
Borers may infest weakened trees.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern. Caterpillars can
eat significant amounts of foliage.