Fact Sheet ST-240
November 1993
Eucommia ulmoides
Figure 1. Middle-aged Hardy Rubber Tree.
Hardy Rubber Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
If you want green leaves on a tree during a severe
drought, this is your tree! This little-known but urbantough, very attractive, 40 to 60-foot-high, slowgrowing, deciduous tree has a dense, symmetrical oval
to rounded crown and low-branched silhouette, making
it ideal for use as a specimen, shade or street tree (Fig.
1). The thin, three to eight-inch-long, glossy, dark
green leaves are almost totally resistant to pests and
disease and remain an attractive dark green throughout
the summer, changing only to a paler green before
dropping in early fall. The foliage is quite striking
and appears to glimmer in the moonlight or when lit
from above. Branches ascend forming an upright
silhouette in winter. The inconspicuous blooms are
followed by the production of small, 1.5-inch-long,
flat, winged seeds. Only one or two corrective
prunings at an early age normally is all that is needed
to develop good structure in the crown.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Eucommia ulmoides
Pronunciation: yoo-KOM-ee-uh ul-MOY-deez
Common name(s): Hardy Rubber Tree
Family: Eucommiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; screen; shade tree; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); specimen; sidewalk
cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-240, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Eucommia ulmoides -- Hardy Rubber Tree Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Eucommia ulmoides -- Hardy Rubber Tree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Hardy Rubber Tree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The Chinese have used the Hardy Rubber Tree for
more than 2,000 years for its medicinal value. Trees
there rarely reach a mature size since they are
harvested regularly and stripped of their ridged or
furrowed, grey/brown bark. Hardy Rubber Tree may
be the only tree which grows in cold climates from
which a rubber product can be obtained. This rubbery
substance is visible as thin strands which bridge two
sections of a torn leaf.
Hardy Rubber Tree should be grown in full sun on
moist soil but when well-established tolerates
extensive drought. Trees have been growing in parts
of North Carolina for many years without irrigation
and have survived extreme drought in very poor, clay
soil in the full sun. But they grow slowly. They
should be grown and tried more often in urban areas
such as in highway medians, along streets and as a
medium-sized shade tree. Growth rate appears to be
quite slow but could probably be improved with
adequate irrigation. The tree is adapted to high soil
pH.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
Amazingly free of any problems but do not plant
it in poorly-drained soil.