Fact Sheet ST-241
November 1993
Eugenia spp.
Figure 1. Middle-aged Stopper.
Stopper1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Eugenia is a large group of plants, some native
and some non-native, including evergreen trees and
shrubs, some of which have been reclassified to the
genus Syzygium (Fig. 1). The evergreen leaves are
firm and glossy, and the flowers white. It is the dried
buds of Eugenia aromatica (Syzygium aromaticum)
which become the fragrant "herb" cloves. The flowers
are followed by the production of berries, some types
of which are edible. All these traits - the attractive
foliage, flowers, and berries - help make Eugenia a
popular landscape choice in warm climate areas, such
as California, Florida, and Hawaii. Eugenia confusa
(Ironwood, Red Stopper) is native to Florida and
grows to about 35 feet and is well suited for street tree
and parking lot planting. Eugenia foetida (Spanish
Stopper) is also native and grows to about 15 feet tall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Eugenia spp.
Pronunciation: yoo-JEE-nee-uh species
Common name(s): Stopper, Eugenia
Family: Myrtaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; screen; trainable as a standard; shade tree;
narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk
cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-241, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Eugenia spp. -- Stopper Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; upright; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; tree
wants to grow with several trunks but can be trained to
grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Eugenia spp. -- Stopper Page 3
Current year twig color: brown
Figure 3. Foliage of Stopper.
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The smooth, brown to grey, mottled bark and tight
canopy of fine-textured leaves makes Eugenia well
suited for planting as a specimen in any yard. Trees
can be trained in the nursery to one central trunk or
allowed and encouraged to develop multiple trunks.
They create shade for a patio or deck, but will not
grow to the large, often overpowering size of a Ficus
tree. They are often used along streets, in highway
medians and in parking lots because they adapt to
small soil spaces and do not become very large. Street
and parking lot trees are often specified to have one
trunk to allow for vehicle clearance beneath the crown.
Multiple trunked trees are often specified for specimen
planting so the beautiful bark can be displayed.
Eugenia should be grown in full sun or part shade
on well-drained soil. Once established in the
landscape, they are drought tolerant requiring little, if
any, irrigation.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings.
Pests
Psyllids limit the tree’s usefulness in parts of
California.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.