Fact Sheet ST-242
November 1993
Evodia danielii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Korean Evodia.
Korean Evodia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Korean Evodia is a little-known but highly
desirable small, deciduous tree, often seen at 15 to 25
feet high with an equal or greater spread but is capable
of reaching 50 feet in height (Fig. 1). Specimens
reaching 50 feet tall are rare. The pinnately
compound, dark green leaves cast a light shade below
the tree and remain attractive and disease-free
throughout the summer. The leaves often drop in
autumn while still green, though some trees have been
known to provide a display of clear yellow fall foliage.
In early summer, many showy, flat-topped flower
clusters appear, the white, fragrant blossoms attracting
a multitude of bees. Following this gorgeous display
of blooms is the production of ornamental, red to
black fruits.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Evodia danielii
Pronunciation: ee-VOE-dee-uh dan-ee-ELL-ee-eye
Common name(s): Korean Evodia, Bebe Tree
Family: Rutaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; shade tree; specimen; residential street tree;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-242, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Evodia danielii -- Korean Evodia Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: crenate
Leaflet shape: oblong; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Evodia danielii -- Korean Evodia Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Figure 3. Foliage of Korean Evodia.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Evodia should be grown and used more often as a
small tree, its mound-shaped crown providing shade
for small areas. Well-suited for patios and other small
areas, including residences, Evodia deserves to be tried
more as an urban tree. It could be suited for planting
close to power and telephone lines since heightincrease slows down with age giving way to more
horizontal growth. The tree is often seen 25 feet tall
spreading 25 to 35 feet with several large-diameter
branches dominating the crown. These are covered
with smooth grey bark and originate close to the
ground (three to five feet from the ground) on
unpruned trees and can form a beautiful multi-trunked
effect, if desired. The trees can be pruned to develop
a clear trunk which would be suited for planting close
to the curb along the street or parking lot.
According to one report, the wood is brittle and
subject to storm damage, and the trees may be
relatively short-lived, 15 to 40-years. I have found
this to be related to embedded bark between major
limbs or trunks. Dr. Michael Dirr of the University of
Georgia has observed many trees throughout the south
which appear to be doing fine. Prune so that main
branches remain less than half the diameter of the
trunk to perhaps increase longevity by reducing branch
breakage.
Korean Evodia should be grown in full sun on
moist but well-drained, fertile soil. It tolerates drought
once established and will grow nicely in poor soil,
including moderately-drained clay.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Watch
where the tree is located since bees are attracted to the
flowers in great numbers.