Fact Sheet ST-243
November 1993
Fagus grandifolia
Figure 1. Middle-aged American Beech.
American Beech1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This massive tree will slowly reach a height and
spread of 50 or more feet (Fig. 1). Forest grown trees
reach up to 120 feet. The tree is naturally lowbranched with attractive glossy green leaves providing
deep, inviting shade. Little grows in the dense shade
of a Beech tree but if low branches are left on the tree
no ground cover or grass is needed. In the fall, the
leaves turn bronze but weather to a light tan color.
Some leaves are held late into the winter if not blown
off by the wind and the thin, smooth, silvery-gray bark
is quite ornamental. The bark looks like elephant skin
on older specimens. The four tiny nuts in each spiny
bur of this American native are much prized by birds
and various mammals, including man. The wood is
almost white and is used most often in toys, cookware,
furniture and for barrels which age beer. The tree is
very resistant to decay under water so it was used to
make water wheels in Colonial times. The wood is
also used for tool handles, chairs, cuttings boards, and
for making charcoal.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fagus grandifolia
Pronunciation: FAY-gus gran-dih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): American Beech
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-243, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fagus grandifolia -- American Beech Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 50 to 75 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; should be grown with a
single leader; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Fagus grandifolia -- American Beech Page 3
Current year twig thickness: thin
Figure 3. Foliage of American Beech.
Wood specific gravity: 0.64
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Branch structure is typically very good, with one
central trunk growing straight up through the crown of
the tree. Many branches are often horizontally
oriented, small in diameter, and well secured to the
trunk.
American Beech needs a loose, acid soil which is
well-drained yet can retain enough moisture for its
shallow root system. The root zone should be free of
compaction and grass competition. Not a good street
or parking lot tree due to its need for good soil and
low-branching, horizontal habit. Plant it on large
estates along entry drives to large commercial
properties or as a specimen in a park or campus
setting. Young trees collected from the woods are
difficult to transplant and are best simply preserved
where they naturally occur, or should be planted from
nursery-bought stock. Insect and disease problems are
usually not very serious, but this is not an urbantough, downtown type of tree. Give it plenty of
above-ground and below-ground rooting space. It is
not suited for dry climates.
Pests
Aphid colonies on the lower branches can be
dislodged with a strong stream of water from the
garden hose. Colonies are often disposed of by
predatory insects.
Borers such as flat-headed appletree borer or
two-lined chestnut borer bore into trees weakened by
stress. Prevent the insect infestations by keeping trees
healthy with regular fertilization and irrigation in dry
weather.
Regular inspections of the trunk and branches are
suggested for early detection of scales. Beech scale
can be devastating to trees in the northeastern United
States.
Certain caterpillars can be controlled with sprays
of Bacillus thuringiensis. Insect identification allows
proper spray recommendations to be made.
Diseases
Usually none are serious provided soil is not
compacted and is well-drained.
Several fungi cause leaf spots but are generally not
serious to warrant chemical control.
Powdery mildew causes a white coating on the
leaves. The disease is most common late in the season.
Bleeding canker forms cankers from which a
brownish liquid oozes. Crown symptoms include
leaves of smaller size and lighter green color than
normal. In severe cases the leaves wilt and the
branches die. Avoid feeding with high nitrogen
fertilizers as it seems to worsen the condition of
infected trees.
Fagus grandifolia -- American Beech Page 4
Beech bark disease occurs when the feeding site of
woolly Beech scale is invaded by a fungus. The
fungus kills the bark and in the process, the insects.
There are no satisfactory controls for the fungus.
Control the disease by controlling the scale with a
horticultural oil.
Cankers infect, girdle, and occasionally kill
branches. Prune out the infected branches.
During periods of high temperatures and low
rainfall Beech may scorch. Make sure trees are
adequately watered and mulched.