Fact Sheet ST-244
November 1993
Fagus sylvatica
Figure 1. Young European Beech.
European Beech1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
European Beech grows into a wide oval, 80 to 100
feet tall and spreads 50 to 70 feet (Fig. 1). Branches
normally sweep the ground in a graceful fashion. The
tree grows slowly, is hard to transplant and prefers a
sunny location and a moist, light soil. Though not a
street tree, the tree makes one of the finest specimens
of all those available in North America for large scale
landscapes. European Beech is somewhat tolerant of
heat and dry soil, but it is best to locate it where it
would receive adequate moisture. The cultivars
‘Pendula’ and ‘Fastigiata’ are more available than the
species and very attractive.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fagus sylvatica
Pronunciation: FAY-gus sill-VAT-ih-kuh
Common name(s): European Beech
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; shade tree; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 75 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-244, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fagus sylvatica -- European Beech Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; should be
grown with a single leader; very showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Fagus sylvatica -- European Beech Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of European Beech.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
European Beech has given rise to many cultivars:
‘Albo-variegata’ - leaves margined white;
‘Asplenifolia’ - cut leaves; ‘Atropunica’ - leaves
purple; ‘Cochleata’ - smaller, spoon-shaped leaves;
‘Cuprea’ - leaves copper colored; ‘Dawycki’ - upright
growth habit; ‘Fastigiata’ - upright growth habit;
‘Laciniata’ - leaves cut, wider more regularly-shaped
than ‘Asplenifolia’; ‘Macrophylla’ - larger leaves;
‘Miltonensis’ - leader erect, main branches horizontal,
side branches pendulous; ‘Pendula’ - weeping habit;
‘Purpurea Pendula’ - weeping with purple leaves;
‘Quercifolia’ - slow growing, leaves oak-like;
‘Riversii’ - young foliage reddish then purple;
‘Rohanii’ - similar to ‘Laciniata’; ‘Roseo-marginata’ -
purple leaves with light pink border, grow in shade to
prevent leaf burn, not easily grown; ‘Rotundifolia’ -
leaves round; ‘Spaethiana’ - leaves purple; ‘Tortuosa’ -
low, spreading, umbrella-like; ‘Tricolor’ - leaves green
and white with pink margins; ‘Zlatia’ - leaves golden
in spring.
Pests
Usually none are serious. Aphid colonies on the
lower branches can be dislodged with a strong stream
of water from the garden hose. Colonies are often
disposed of by predatory insects.
Borers such as flat-headed appletree borer or
two-lined chestnut borer bore into trees weakened by
some stress. Prevent the insect infestations by keeping
trees healthy with regular fertilization and irrigation in
dry weather.
Regular inspections of the trunk and branches are
suggested for early detection of scales. Horticultural
oil sprays will help control scales.
Certain caterpillars can be controlled with sprays
of Bacillus thuringiensis.
Diseases
Usually none are serious provided soil is loose and
is well-drained.
Fagus sylvatica -- European Beech Page 4
Several fungi cause leaf spots but are generally not
serious to warrant chemical control.
Powdery mildew causes a white coating on the
leaves. The disease is most common late in the
season.
Bleeding canker forms cankers from which a
brownish liquid oozes. Crown symptoms include
leaves of smaller size and lighter green color than
normal. In severe cases the leaves wilt and the
branches die. Avoid feeding with high nitrogen
fertilizers as it seems to worsen the condition of
infected trees.
Beech bark disease occurs when the feeding site of
woolly Beech scale is invaded by a fungus. The
fungus kills the bark and in the process, the insects.
There are no satisfactory controls for the fungus.
Control the disease by controlling the scale with a
horticultural oil.
Cankers infect, girdle, and kill branches. Prune
out the infected branches.
During periods of high temperatures and low
rainfall Beech leaves may scorch. Make sure trees are
adequately watered.