Fact Sheet ST-255
November 1993
Ficus retusa
Figure 1. Mature Cuban-Laurel.
Cuban-Laurel1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This rapidly-growing, rounded, broad-headed,
evergreen tree (also known as Ficus microcarpa) can
reach 50 feet or more in height with an equal spread
(Fig. 1). The glossy, dark green, leathery leaves are
densely clothed on large, somewhat weeping branches
and are usually infested with thrips. New growth,
produced all year long, is a light rose to chartreuse
color, giving the tree a lovely two-toned effect. The
smooth, light grey trunk is quite striking, can grow to
three or four feet in diameter, and it firmly supports
the massively spreading canopy. Branches trained to
remain less than half the diameter of the trunk are
well-secured to the trunk.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ficus retusa
Pronunciation: FYE-kuss ree-TOO-suh
Common name(s): Cuban-Laurel
Family: Moraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: suitable for growing indoors; not recommended
for planting
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-255, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ficus retusa -- Cuban-Laurel Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; showy trunk; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Few aerial roots are produced making this a
suitable street tree. Also used as a park tree, CubanLaurel tolerates trimming well and can be shaped and
sheared into a hedge, screen or barrier. It also makes
Ficus retusa -- Cuban-Laurel Page 3
a wonderful shade tree on large properties. Plant at
Figure 3. Foliage of Cuban-Laurel.
least 10 feet from the curb or sidewalk so surface roots
won’t cause damage. The fruit stains cars and
sidewalks and can be generally messy on paved and
other hard surfaces. Importation of the wasp which
pollinates the flowers may stimulate production of
fertile fruit and this could allow the tree to become a
pesty weed.
Growing easily in full sun or partial shade, CubanLaurel thrives on various well-drained soils and is
moderately salt-tolerant.
The cultivar ‘Green Gem’ is resistant to thrips and
is commonly available.
Propagation is by cuttings or air layerings.
Pests
Scales and thrips are problems. Thrips often infest
the foliage but will not kill the plant.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.