Fact Sheet ST-251
November 1993
Ficus benjamina
Figure 1. Middle-aged Weeping Fig.
Weeping Fig1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This is a huge tree growing to 60 feet tall and 60
to 70 feet wide (Fig. 1). The dense, rounded canopy
and gracefully drooping branches of Weeping Fig
made it quite popular as a landscape tree until
recently. The thick, shiny, two to five-inch-long,
evergreen leaves generously clothe the long branches,
and the tiny figs eventually turn a deep red. Branches
will weep toward the ground forming a canopy so
dense that nothing grows beneath it.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ficus benjamina
Pronunciation: FYE-kuss ben-juh-MYE-nuh
Common name(s): Weeping Fig
Family: Moraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
hedge; suitable for growing indoors; trainable as a
standard; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 45 to 60 feet
Spread: 60 to 100 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading; weeping
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-251, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ficus benjamina -- Weeping Fig Page 2
Fruit
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Fruit can stain cars and sidewalks so the tree
should not be planted close to streets, walks or parking
lots. It also makes quite a mess around the tree as the
fruit fall to the ground. The tree is much too large for
Ficus benjamina -- Weeping Fig Page 3
residential planting unless it is used as a hedge or
Figure 3. Foliage of Weeping Fig.
clipped screen, but can be seen growing into massive
trees in parks and other large-scale areas. Aerial roots
descend from the branches, touch the ground and take
root, eventually forming numerous sturdy trunks which
can clog a landscape. Trees can grow to be quite
large and spreading in this fashion. Roots grow
rapidly invading gardens, growing under and lifting
sidewalks, patios, and driveways.
There have been recent reports of fertile fruit
germinating in some landscapes in south Florida. This
is of concern since this could give the tree the
potential of spreading and perhaps becoming a pesty
weed, something which is definitely not needed in
south Florida.
Able to tolerate severe pruning, Weeping Fig can
also be successfully used as a clipped hedge or screen
and is probably best used in this fashion, or can be
trained into an espalier or topiary. Young trees are
often grown in containers, appearing on patios, at
entranceways, or indoors.
Weeping Fig will grow in full sun or partial shade
on any well-drained soil. Plants should be carefully
watered when young and later during droughts. Plants
are very frost-sensitive.
The cultivar ‘Exotica’ has wavy-edged leaves with
long, twisted tips. There are other Ficus such as Ficus
rubiginosa which do not produce aerial roots and are
much better suited as landscape trees for shade
because they will not take over the landscape as will
Weeping Fig.
Propagation is by cuttings or layering.
Pests
Weeping Fig may be infected by scales, but is
resistant to leaf thrips which will distort new leaves on
some other figs.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.