Fact Sheet ST-257
November 1993
Ficus rubiginosa
Figure 1. Middle-aged Rusty Fig.
Rusty Fig1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This broad, spreading evergreen tree is densely
covered with oval, blunt-tipped, three to six-inch-long,
medium green, smooth leaves, the undersides of which
are brown and hairy (Fig. 1). One of the hardiest of
the rubber trees, Rusty Fig makes an attractive
specimen tree, especially when only a few major
branches are allowed to develop creating a more open
form. It does not develop the profusion of aerial roots
which some others do. Rusty Fig’s dense growth habit
and moderate growth rate make it better suited for
smaller landscapes than most other Ficus trees. It
grows to about 35 feet in 30-years. It is well-suited as
a shade or street tree and should require little
maintenance once initial pruning creates a good
structural habit. Space major branches along the trunk
and keep them trimmed so they remain less than half
the diameter of the trunk. It is among the best ficus
trees for frost-free climates.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ficus rubiginosa
Pronunciation: FYE-kuss roo-bij-ih-NO-suh
Common name(s): Rusty Fig
Family: Moraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge;
suitable for growing indoors; large parking lot islands
(> 200 square feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet
wide); medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200
square feet in size); recommended for buffer strips
around parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; shade tree; specimen; residential
street tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban
areas where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted
soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-257, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ficus rubiginosa -- Rusty Fig Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 35 to 50 feet
Spread: 35 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Ficus rubiginosa -- Rusty Fig Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Rusty Fig.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Easily grown in full sun or partial shade, Rusty
Fig will thrive on a variety of well-drained soils.
Once established, it can withstand periods of drought
and 30-degrees F. for a short time.
The cultivar ‘Variegata’ has leaves variegated with
cream-yellow.
Propagation is by cuttings or air layers.
Pests
Two problems are mites and scales.
Diseases
Rusty Fig is subject to root rot on poorly drained
soils.