Fact Sheet ST-250
November 1993
Ficus aurea
Figure 1. Mature Strangler Fig.
Strangler Fig1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Often starting out as an epiphyte nestled in the
limbs of another tree, the native Strangler Fig is vinelike while young, later strangling its host with heavy
aerial roots and eventually becoming a self-supporting,
independent tree (Fig. 1). Not recommended for small
landscapes, Strangler Fig grows quickly and can reach
60 feet in height with an almost equal spread. The
broad, spreading, lower limbs are festooned with
secondary roots which create many slim but rigid
trunks once they reach the ground and take hold.
They become a maintenance headache as these roots
need to be removed to keep a neat-looking landscape.
The shiny, thick, dark green leaves create dense shade
and the surface roots add to the problem of
maintaining a lawn beneath this massive tree. The
fruit drops and makes a mess beneath the tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ficus aurea
Pronunciation: FYE-kuss AR-ee-uh
Common name(s): Strangler Fig, Golden Fig
Family: Moraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; suitable for growing indoors;
reclamation plant; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 50 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-250, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ficus aurea -- Strangler Fig Page 2
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Ficus aurea -- Strangler Fig Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Strangler Fig.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Easily grown in full sun or partial shade, Strangler
Fig can literally be planted, watered a few times, and
forgotten. A variety of soils, including wet, will do,
and Strangler Fig is moderately salt-tolerant. More
often than not, large Strangler Figs were existing trees,
not planted. Seeds germinate easily in the landscape
allowing the tree to invade nearby land.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests
Primary pests are aphids and scales followed by
sooty mold.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.