Fact Sheet ST-252
November 1993
Ficus elastica
Figure 1. Young Rubber Tree.
Rubber Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Often seen as an interior container plant, Rubber
Tree has large, 5 to 12-inch-long, thick, glossy
evergreen leaves, multiple trunks, and a spreading,
irregular canopy (Fig. 1). Able to reach 100 feet in
height in its native habitat in the jungle but most often
seen at about 25 to 40 feet in the landscape, Rubber
Tree is useful as a screen, shade, patio, or specimen
tree. Its coarse texture makes a strong statement in the
landscape. Use as a street tree is limited by the tree’s
tendency to break apart in strong winds. Perhaps the
tree could be made stronger by removing branches
with weak tight-angle crotches and spacing major
lateral branches along one central trunk. Eliminate
multiple trunks early in the life of the tree and prune
lateral branches so they remain smaller than half the
diameter of the trunk to increase longevity in the
landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ficus elastica
Pronunciation: FYE-kuss ee-LASS-tick-uh
Common name(s): Rubber Tree, India-Rubber Fig
Family: Moraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
suitable for growing indoors; recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; screen; trainable
as a standard; shade tree; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 45 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-252, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ficus elastica -- Rubber Tree Page 2
Crown density: dense
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Ficus elastica -- Rubber Tree Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Rubber Tree.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Rubber Tree will grow quickly in sun or partial
shade on almost any well-drained soil. The soil
should be allowed to become fairly dry between
waterings, especially in containers. Rubber Tree
makes a nice house plant if it is not over-watered.
Available cultivars include: ‘Doescheri’ has
yellow-variegated leaves; ‘Decora’ produces broad,
reddish-green leaves with ivory-colored veins running
down center of leaf; ‘Variegata’ has light green leaves
with white or yellow margins.
Propagation is by layering or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
occasionally scales are a problem.