Fact Sheet ST-259
November 1993
Firmiana simplex
Figure 1. Young Chinese Parasoltree.
Chinese Parasoltree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chinese Parasoltree has a very unusual appearance
for a deciduous tree, having green stems and bark and
extremely large, three to five-lobed bright green leaves
(Fig. 1). Most people either love it or hate it due to
its striking habit and coarse texture. Each leaf is up to
12 inches across and casts as much shade as an actual
parasol. Chinese Parasoltree has a dense, upright, oval
canopy and reaches 35 to 50 feet in height, spreading
15 to 20 feet. In June or July, 10 to 20-inch-long,
upright, loose, terminal panicles of yellow/green
blooms appear and are followed by the production of
peculiar pods which split open into four petal-like
sections to reveal the small, round seeds. These pods
are often harvested for use in winter decorations. The
foliage of Chinese Parasoltree can turn brilliant yellow
before dropping in fall to reveal an interesting
branching structure of green stems. The yellow
complements the green trunk very nicely.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Firmiana simplex
Pronunciation: fer-mee-AY-nuh SIM-plecks
Common name(s): Chinese Parasoltree, Varnish-Tree
Family: Sterculiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-259, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Firmiana simplex -- Chinese Parasoltree Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; undulate
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; showy trunk; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green; gray
Firmiana simplex -- Chinese Parasoltree Page 3
Current year twig thickness: thick
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Parasoltree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree appears "out of place" to some
horticulturists but many people enjoy the dramatic
impact one or several of these trees can have on a
landscape. The tree lends a tropical effect and is
probably best used only occasionally as a specimen. It
could be tried as a street tree on a small scale but may
be objectionable due to the so-called messy nature of
the tree. Leaves are large, decompose slowly and
blow around in the landscape after they fall. Falling
fruits also contribute to the mess but they are dry.
The tree looks a bit scraggly in winter with old flower
stalks persisting on the branch tips. There is a tree in
Raleigh, North Carolina which is 45 feet tall with an
18-inch-diameter trunk and still growing. But on
many sites, count on about 30-years of service unless
located in an area with lots of soil space and pruned
regularly to develop good form.
Branches can be poorly attached to the trunk so be
sure that branches grow no larger than about half the
diameter of the trunk. This will help ensure a stronger
attachment to the tree. Roots often grow close to the
surface in clay soil especially near the trunk.
Chinese Parasoltree should be grown a full-sun,
wind-protected location. Trees will grow in shade
with an upright, almost columnar form as they reach
for the sunlight. Trees should be regularly watered
when young but become drought-tolerant once
established. They tolerate clay soil but often develop
root rot if the soil is not well-drained. Not a
downtown tree.
The cultivar ‘Variegata’ has green and whitedappled leaves. Rare in the nursery trade.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
A trunk scale may kill a tree if not controlled.