Fact Sheet ST-260
November 1993
Franklinia alatamaha
Figure 1. Middle-aged Franklin-Tree.
Franklin-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This is an excellent small tree native to Georgia,
reaching a maximum of 30 feet but it is usually
smaller in a sunny landscape (Fig. 1). It is somewhat
pyramidal when young becoming more rounded with
age with many thin stems and trunks. It is best used
as a specimen or in borders, to show off its fragrant,
white, camellia-like flowers, three inches across, that
bloom from July to late summer when few other trees
bloom. The bright green foliage turns a vivid
orange-red in the fall while some flowers are still in
bloom. Ridged grey bark with prominent vertical
white striations adds winter interest. Franklin-Tree
typically grows with numerous vertical stems or trunks
originating at or near ground level.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Franklinia alatamaha
Pronunciation: frank-LIN-ee-uh
uh-lah-tah-MAH-hah
Common name(s): Franklin-Tree, Franklinia
Family: Theaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; near a deck
or patio; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-260, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Franklinia alatamaha -- Franklin-Tree Page 2
Growth rate: slow
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; oblanceolate; obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; pleasant
fragrance; summer flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Franklinia alatamaha -- Franklin-Tree Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Franklin-Tree.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Franklin-Tree does best in well-drained, rich, acid
soil, with ample water, and partial sun in the southern
part of its range. Drainage must be excellent and the
tree does not tolerate clay soil and is only slightly or
moderately drought-tolerant. Best to provide a
permanent irrigation system for Franklin-Tree.
Pests
It has no known pests.
Diseases
The most serious problem of Franklin-Tree is a
root rot disease. The best protection is to plant in a
soil where the disease has not been active. The tree
has been difficult to establish in some areas, perhaps
because of disease problems. But the beauty of this
tree makes your extra effort worthwhile.