Fact Sheet ST-265
November 1993
Fraxinus oxycarpa ‘Raywood’
Figure 1. Middle-aged Raywood Ash.
Raywood Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This Ash is a fine-textured, deciduous tree which
is capable of reaching more than 80 feet in height but
will more commonly be 40 to 50 feet tall with a 25
foot spread in a landscape, opening into a full,
rounded canopy with age (Fig. 1). Young trees are
somewhat upright or oval. The lustrous, dark green
leaflets create a light shade beneath the tree, making it
well-suited for use as a large lawn specimen or shade
tree. The leaves turn various shades of red to purple
before falling in autumn.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fraxinus oxycarpa ‘Raywood’
Pronunciation: FRACK-sih-nus ock-sih-KAR-puh
Common name(s): Raywood Ash, Claret Ash
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-265, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fraxinus oxycarpa ‘Raywood’ -- Raywood Ash Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: purple; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
There is no fruit on this tree.
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Fraxinus oxycarpa ‘Raywood’ -- Raywood Ash Page 3
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Reportedly maintains a central leader in youth but
only after competing upright stems and branches have
been removed. Be sure to space main lateral branches
along the trunk and keep internal secondary branches
intact to develop good branch structure. This allows
each main limb to develop more fully and could
increase durability by increasing taper along main
branches. Do not allow major scaffold limbs to grow
opposite each other on the trunk as this leads to poor
structure and eventually could form a weak tree.
It should be grown in full sun and is moderately
drought-tolerant once established. Although trees can
tolerate wet sites, they will perform much better in
well-drained conditions. Surface roots can be a
problem on wet sites and on clay soil but they
otherwise grow in a range of soil from sand to clay.
The cultivar ‘Raywood’ has exceptionally striking
red fall foliage and produces no seeds; it is often
known as the ‘Claret Ash’. ‘Flame’ turns deep
burgundy in the fall similar to burgundy Sweetgum.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern,
although possibly borers. This tree is reportedly
resistant to anthracnose foliage disease and Ash
lygusbug which attacks other Ashes.