Fact Sheet ST-271
November 1993
Fraxinus velutina
Figure 1. Middle-aged Velvet Ash.
Velvet Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This fast-growing, deciduous, native North
American tree reaches a height of 30 to 50 feet,
depending upon cultural conditions (Fig. 1). It is
capable of growing taller in its native habitat. The
three to six-inch-long leaves are divided into multiple
leaflets and turn a brilliant yellow in fall before
dropping. The inconspicuous, green, springtime
flowers are followed by the production of showy,
persistent fruits. The tree has been widely grown in
California and in parts of the west including Texas.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fraxinus velutina
Pronunciation: FRACK-sih-nus vell-LOO-tih-nuh
Common name(s): Velvet Ash, Modesto Ash,
Arizona Ash
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; shade tree; sidewalk
cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 45 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-271, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fraxinus velutina -- Velvet Ash Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2
inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Fraxinus velutina -- Velvet Ash Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree has been traditionally difficult to maintain
due to the development of many upright trunks
originating from the same position on the main trunk.
This condition has lead to the creation of weak trees
which often break apart at the base of the multiple
trunks. Careful pruning and branch selection is
required during the first 15 years after planting to
ensure good, strong trunk and branch development. It
is important to purchase good quality planting stock
which has a central leader and no upright multiple
trunks. This will make the tree much easier to
maintain in the landscape. Some horticulturists do not
recommend planting this tree due to the high pruning
requirement and susceptibility to breakage.
Velvet Ash should be grown in full sun on any
soil and will tolerate both alkaline and rocky soils. It
is tolerant of wet soil and has been extensively used
along streets in areas with poor drainage. Roots often
grow close to the soil surface causing a nuisance by
breaking sidewalks and curbs.
The cultivar ‘Arizona’ is widely planted but
reportedly has the same problems as the species.
Propagation is easily done by seed.
Pests
It is very susceptible to borers. Trees often have a
short-life.
Diseases
Texas Ash is susceptible to verticillium wilt.