Fact Sheet ST-261
November 1993
Fraxinus americana
Figure 1. Young White Ash.
White Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
White Ash is resistant to heat, although it is native
to moist locations, including river bottoms and welldrained upland sites (Fig. 1). It grows 50 to 80 feet
tall and wide. The trees produce a good seed-set
every two to three years and they germinate in the
landscape creating a nuisance and perhaps look a bit
messy. The seeds are used by many birds and can be
produced in countless numbers. The tree grows
rapidly and is almost pyramidal when young, but
gradually slows down and develops a more spreading
round or oval shape. White Ash prefers a sunny
exposure where it develops a showy yellow fall color.
Fall color can be striking or dull, depending on the
tree and environmental conditions.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fraxinus americana
Pronunciation: FRACK-sih-nus
uh-mair-ih-KAY-nuh
Common name(s): White Ash
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 80 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-261, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fraxinus americana -- White Ash Page 2
or less identical crown forms
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown shape: oval; round; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire; serrulate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: purple; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: tan
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.60
Fraxinus americana -- White Ash Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of White Ash.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree is easy to transplant although it can be
coarse-rooted, producing troublesome surface roots. A
good tree for large open areas but much too large for
home landscapes unless you want lots of shade. The
potential disease and insect problems limit use to parks
and other areas where the tree will not be missed if it
dies. Extensive use as a street tree in some areas
could be risky because of potential insect and disease
problems, especially borers, and a sensitivity to
drought. Ash decline is one of its major problems and
is probably caused by a complex of conditions,
including a mycoplasma-like organism.
White Ash which have not been properly pruned
can break apart in wind storms, but it has better
branch structure than seedling Green Ash. Be sure to
space branches along the trunk and remove those
which are vigorously growing upright with narrow
branch crotches. Ash is prone to develop double and
multiple leaders (trunks) which must be removed for
proper tree development. Major branches often
develop opposite each other, and one should be
removed to develop good structure.
Ash does not tolerate soil compaction or
construction injury due to an extensive root system. It
appreciates good soil and is probably not a good
choice for poor, urban soils. It is not tolerant of heavy
clay.
The following cultivars were selected for being
seedless and for the better purplish fall color: ‘Autumn
Applause’; ‘Autumn Purple’. ‘Rosehill’ has better
branch arrangement. Fraxinus texensis may be the
best Ash of Texas but it is largely untested in urban
areas. Fraxinus velutina has been widely planted in
the Dallas area and performs well, but has weak
branch crotches.
Pests
Borers are common on Ash and they can kill trees.
The most common borers infesting Ash are Ash borer,
lilac borer and carpenterworm. Ash borer bores into
the trunk at or near the soil line causing tree dieback.
Lilac borer causes swellings on the trunk and limbs
where the insect enters the tree. The carpenterworm
Fraxinus americana -- White Ash Page 4
larvae bore into the heartwood but come to the outside
of the tree to push out frass and sawdust. Heavily
infested trees can be severely weakened. Keep trees
as healthy as possible by fertilizing regularly and
watering during dry weather.
Aphids are often seen but are usually not serious.
In late summer, fall webworm covers branches
with webbing. The nests in branches close to the
ground can be pruned out when first noticed. Bacillus
thuringiensis may control fall webworm.
The Ash flower-gall looks like a disease but is
actually a mite problem. The mites feed on the
flowers causing abnormal growth. The galls dry out
and persist on the tree into winter.
Diseases
A rust disease causes distorted leaves and swollen
twigs. Small, yellow, cup-like structures, producing
yellow spores, appear on the infected areas. Controls
are usually not needed.
A number of fungi cause leaf spots on Ash. The
disease is worse in wet years and is partially controlled
by gathering and disposing of diseased, fallen leaves.
Anthracnose is also called leaf scorch and leaf
spot. Infected parts of the leaves turn brown,
especially along the margins. Infected leaves fall
prematurely. Rake up and destroy infected leaves.
Chemical controls are not practical or economical on
most large trees.
Canker diseases cause branch dieback and death of
the tree when the trunk is infected. Try to keep trees
healthy with regular fertilization.
Powdery mildew makes a white coating on the
leaves.
Ash ring spot virus causes chlorotic red and
yellowish spots or rings on the leaves. Infected trees
may be stunted and dieback, but often the problem in
minor.
Verticillium wilt causes branches of infected trees
to wilt and die, eventually the entire tree may die.
Keep trees healthy and fertilize infected trees to
suppress disease symptoms.