Fact Sheet ST-270
November 1993
Fraxinus texensis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Texas Ash.
Texas Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Texas Ash creates a wonderful shade tree, its short
trunk supporting a broad, rounded crown of seveninch-long leaves divided into leaflets (Fig. 1).
Unfortunately, it is rare in the trade. Trees slowly
grow to about 50 feet tall but most are seen 25 to 30
feet tall. The leaves are dark green to olive green
above and paler green below and cast a medium shade
beneath the tree. Petioles are an attractive pale red to
pink, and fall color is showy ranging from orange/red
to purple. The inconspicuous flowers appear before
the leaves emerge in spring, and are followed by the
production of 1.5-inch-long, light red to pink, winged
fruit, or samara. It often grows as a multi-stemmed
tree in the wild on limestones soils in central Texas.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fraxinus texensis
Pronunciation: FRACK-sih-nus teck-SEN-sis
Common name(s): Texas Ash
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; shade tree; small parking
lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; upright
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-270, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fraxinus texensis -- Texas Ash Page 2
Crown density: moderate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire; serrate
Leaflet shape: obovate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2
inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; purple; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: pink
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Fraxinus texensis -- Texas Ash Page 3
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Texas Ash grows in full sun on well-drained soil,
either dry or wet, and prefers alkaline soil. It is very
popular in Texas and Oklahoma, but could be
cultivated and planted more in other areas. Trained to
a central leader and a straight trunk it could be used
for city street and parking lot tree planting. It could
be grown in the east in areas with good drainage
especially on sites which are not irrigated due to its
low water requirement or drought tolerance. Texas
Ash will tolerate both soil compaction and air
pollution, making it well-suited for use as a street,
parking lot or median tree. Not as susceptible to
borers as other Ashes.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Probably borers on recently transplanted or stressed
trees.