Fact Sheet ST-266
November 1993
Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Green Ash.
Green Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The somewhat irregularly-shaped tree when young
becoming an oval with age, Green Ash will reach a
height of about 60 feet with a spread of 45 feet (Fig.
1). Upright main branches bear twigs which droop
toward the ground then bend upward at their tips much
like Basswood. This usually does not interfere with
traffic flow beneath the tree since branches do not
droop to the ground. The glossy dark green foliage
will turn yellow in the fall, but color is often muted in
the south. There is a good seed-set annually on
female trees which are used by many birds but some
consider the seeds to be messy. This fast growing tree
will adapt to many different landscape conditions and
can be grown on wet or dry sites, preferring moist.
Trees in USDA hardiness zones 8 and 9 may grow 6
to 10 feet in one year when they are young and
irrigated. Some cities are overplanted with Green Ash.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Pronunciation: FRACK-sih-nus pen-sill-VAN-ih-kuh
Common name(s): Green Ash
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree;
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 70 feet
Spread: 45 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-266, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fraxinus pennsylvanica -- Green Ash Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: crenate; entire; serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: tan
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.56
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Fraxinus pennsylvanica -- Green Ash Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Green Ash.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Green Ash requires regular pruning when it is
young to develop a nice central trunk. It tends to
develop a number of dominant upright trunks or
multiple leaders if it is pruned improperly or left
unpruned. Some nursery operators routinely top them
in the nursery to create a bushy tree. This is not a
good practice and these trees should not be planted
because they will not stay together in a strong storm.
Be sure the trees have one central leader (one trunk)
and branches which are well spaced along the trunk.
If two major branches originate opposite each other,
remove one to improve tree structure and strength.
Green Ash adapts quite well to city street tree
planting pits and other confined soil spaces, probably
due to its tolerance to flooded and wet soil. However,
extensive use as a street tree could be risky because of
potential insect and disease problems, especially
borers. Like some other rapidly-growing trees, surface
roots can develop and become a nuisance as they lift
curbs, sidewalks and make mowing difficult. Planting
only in well-drained uncompacted soil may help keep
surface rooting in check. Using root barriers around
the edge of planting pits and along sidewalks would
deflect roots down, encouraging deeper rooting and
less maintenance problems. Green Ash roots can
tolerate the low soil oxygen conditions present at these
greater soil depths. Trees transplant easily from field
nurseries or from containers and adapt to urban soils
including those with high pH, salt and droughty sites.
Seedling grown trees often produce an abundance
of seed which can be a nuisance, and female trees
often have undesirable flower galls. Superior crown
form and branching habit of cultivars makes planting
cultivars very desirable. A few cultivars are available
and have been tested for eight-years in USDA
hardiness zone 8a and appear vigorous with yellow fall
color: ‘Marshall Seedless’- some seeds, yellow fall
color, fewer insect problems, but losing popularity due
to trees breaking apart and the population has
apparently become contaminated with females since
some are setting seed - ‘Newport’ may be superior;
‘Patmore’ - excellent street tree, straight trunk, good
yellow fall color, seedless, USDA hardiness zone 3 to
7; ‘Summit’ - female, yellow fall color, straight trunk
but pruning required to develop strong structure,
abundant seeds and flower galls can be a nuisance.
Cultivars are budded onto seedling rootstocks.
‘Cimmaron’ is a new plant (USDA hardiness zone 3)
reported to have a strong trunk, good lateral branching
habit, and tolerance to salt. ‘Aerial’ is also new, with
Fraxinus pennsylvanica -- Green Ash Page 4
a narrow columnar habit of unknown height and
spread. The parent was ‘Summit’ Green Ash.
Pests
Borers are common on Ash and they can kill trees.
The most common borers infesting Ash are Ash borer,
lilac borer and carpenterworm. Ash borer bores into
the trunk at or near the soil line causing tree dieback.
Lilac borer causes swellings on the trunk and limbs
where the insect enters the tree. The carpenterworm
larvae bore into the heartwood but come to the outside
of the tree to push out frass and sawdust. Heavily
infested trees can be severely weakened. Keep trees
as healthy as possible by fertilizing regularly and
watering during dry weather.
Aphids are often seen but are usually not serious.
In late summer, fall webworm covers branches
with webbing. The nests in branches close to the
ground can be pruned out when first noticed.
The Ash flower-gall looks like a disease but is
actually a mite problem. The mites feed on the
flowers causing abnormal growth. The galls dry out
and persist on the tree into winter. Apply horticultural
oil sprays before bud break.
Diseases
A rust disease causes distorted leaves and swollen
twigs. Small, yellow, cup-like structures, producing
yellow spores, appear on the infected areas. Controls
are usually not needed.
A number of fungi cause leaf spots on Ash. The
disease is worse in wet years and is partially controlled
by gathering and disposing of diseased, fallen leaves.
Anthracnose is also called leaf scorch and leaf
spot. Infected parts of the leaves turn brown,
especially along the margins. Infected leaves fall
prematurely. Rake up and destroy infected leaves.
Chemical controls are not practical or economical on
large trees. Trees in the south can be severely
affected.
Canker diseases cause branch dieback and death of
the tree when the trunk is infected. Try to keep trees
healthy with regular fertilization.
Powdery mildew makes a white coating on the
leaves.
Ash ring spot virus causes chlorotic green and
reddish spots or rings on the leaves. Infected trees
may be stunted and dieback.
Verticillium wilt causes branches of infected trees
to wilt and die, eventually the entire tree may die.
Keep trees healthy and fertilize infected trees with
high nitrogen fertilizer to suppress disease symptoms.