Fact Sheet ST-264
November 1993
Fraxinus excelsior
Figure 1. Middle-aged Common Ash.
Common Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Common Ash is a broad, spreading, deciduous
tree, capable of reaching 100 feet or more in height
but most often seen growing at a moderate pace at 70
to 80 feet with a 60 to 90-foot spread (Fig. 1). The
dark green, multi-divided leaves are 10 to 12 inches
long and usually drop off in autumn while still green
but some cultivars may turn an attractive yellow first.
The inconspicuous springtime flowers are followed by
clusters of 1.5-inch-long, winged fruits which turn
brown and remain on the trees well after the leaves
have fallen. The low-branched, rounded silhouette of
naked branches on top of the short trunk and the
black, dormant leaf buds help to make common Ash
an attractive winter landscape element.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Fraxinus excelsior
Pronunciation: FRACK-sih-nus eck-SELL-see-or
Common name(s): Common Ash, European Ash
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 60 to 90 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-264, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Fraxinus excelsior -- Common Ash Page 2
Crown density: dense
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; tan
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Fraxinus excelsior -- Common Ash Page 3
Drought tolerance: high
Figure 3. Foliage of Common Ash.
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Like many Ashes, the tree requires careful training
and pruning to develop a central leader with strong
branch structure. Without pruning many branches
originate at the same position on the trunk which
makes them prone to breakage and shortens their life.
Select, then develop up to a dozen main branches
well-spaced along the trunk as far up the tree as
practical.
Common Ash should be grown in full sun or
partial shade and prefers moist, rich soil, and grows
well on calcareous soil. Grows best on deep soils with
adequate moisture, although drought tolerance is
moderate. It tolerates poorly-drained, low-quality and
alkaline soil. Its use is probably limited by borers
which often infest the trunk and cause the tree to
decline. Probably best suited for landscapes with
plenty of soil space for root expansion, not in confined
urban soil.
The cultivars are probably more available than the
species. A few of the many cultivars include:
‘Aurea’ - slow-growing, perhaps to 50 feet tall and
wide, deep yellow fall color, yellow twigs; ‘Aurea
Pendula’, with yellow, pendulous branchlets;
‘Aureovariegata’, leaves variegated or edged with
yellow; ‘Hessei’, 60 feet tall, single leaves, very
disease-resistant, seedless, yellow or little fall color;
‘Nana’, compact, slow-growing dwarf form with small
leaflets; ‘Spectabilis’, pyramidal shape; ‘Pendula’,
weeping form; and ‘Rancho’ (also known as
‘Kimberly’), 30 feet tall, round canopy, yellow fall
foliage.
Propagation of the species is by seed.
Pests
Borers can kill trees. The most common borers
infesting Ash are Ash borer, lilac borer and
carpenterworm. Ash borer bores into the trunk at or
near the soil line causing tree dieback. Lilac borer
causes swellings on the trunk and limbs where the
insect enters the tree. The carpenterworm larvae bore
into the heartwood but come to the outside of the tree
to push out frass and sawdust. Heavily infested trees
can be severely weakened. Keep trees as healthy as
possible by fertilizing regularly and watering during
dry weather, particularly newly transplanted trees or
those stressed from some other problem.
Aphids are often seen but are usually not serious.
In late summer, fall webworm could cover
branches with webbing. The nests in branches close to
the ground can be pruned out when first noticed.
Diseases
There may be a variety of diseases which infect
this Ash. It has not been grown or used extensively.