Fact Sheet ST-272
November 1993
Geijera parviflora
Figure 1. Middle-aged Australian-Willow.
Australian-Willow1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Australian-Willow is an attractive evergreen, 30 to
35 feet tall and 20 feet wide, with an upright, oval
silhouette (Fig. 1). The main inner branches are
composed of strong, wind-resistant wood and are
directed upward, while the outer smaller branches are
somewhat pendulous. This gives a decided weeping
habit to older trees. Younger trees are more ovalshaped. This characteristic, combined with the thin,
narrow, three to six-inch-long, olive green leaves
which droop from the branches, gives the tree much
the same effect as a Weeping Willow. Short panicles
of small, creamy white, showy flowers appear in early
spring and early fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Geijera parviflora
Pronunciation: gay-JEER-uh par-vih-FLOR-uh
Common name(s): Australian-Willow
Family: Rutaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); near a deck
or patio; screen; shade tree; specimen; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 35 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round; weeping
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-272, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Geijera parviflora -- Australian-Willow Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; showy; spring
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; slightly alkaline; acidic;
well-drained
Geijera parviflora -- Australian-Willow Page 3
Drought tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of Australian-Willow.
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Australian-Willow casts a light shade and is ideal
for use around a patio or as a lawn specimen, but may
be too weeping for use as a street tree unless it is
properly trained when it is young. If the lowest main
limbs are located high enough above the ground and
are oriented in an upright-spreading fashion, then there
will be clearance even for large trunks. Only small
branches may have to be removed later as they droop
from the main limbs toward the ground. Otherwise
the tree has very good cultural adaptability to urban
spaces.
Australian-Willow will give best growth in full
sun on moist but well-drained soil although plants can
tolerate light shade and very dry conditions. Trees
grown in the open very rarely require any pruning if
located where the drooping branches will not interfere
with traffic below. A popular tree for the dry
southwest, not really known or planted in the East.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Root
rot may be a problem on sites without excellent
drainage.