Fact Sheet ST-273
November 1993
Ginkgo biloba
Figure 1. Middle-aged Maidenhair Tree.
Maidenhair Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Ginkgo is practically pest-free, resistant to storm
damage, and casts light to moderate shade (Fig. 1).
Young trees are often very open but they fill in to
form a denser canopy. It makes a durable street tree
where there is enough overhead space to accommodate
the large size. The shape is often irregular with a
large branch or two seemingly forming its own tree on
the trunk. But this does not detract from its usefulness
as a city tree unless the tree will be growing in a
restricted overhead space. If this is the case, select
from the narrow upright cultivars such as ‘Princeton
Sentry’ and ‘Fairmont’. Ginkgo tolerates most soil,
including compacted, and alkaline, and grows slowly
to 75 feet or more tall. The tree is easily transplanted
and has a vivid yellow fall color which is second to
none in brilliance, even in the south. However, leaves
fall quickly and the fall color show is short.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ginkgo biloba
Pronunciation: GINK-go bye-LOE-buh
Common name(s): Maidenhair Tree, Ginkgo
Family: Ginkgoaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-273, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ginkgo biloba -- Maidenhair Tree Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 50 to 75 feet
Spread: 50 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed
Leaf shape: fan-shaped
Leaf venation: parallel; palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Ginkgo biloba -- Maidenhair Tree Page 3
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Figure 3. Foliage of Maidenhair Tree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Female plants are wider-spreading than the males.
Only male plants should be used as the female
produces foul smelling fruit in late autumn. The only
way to select a male plant is to purchase a named
cultivar including ‘Autumn Gold’, ‘ Fastigiata’,
‘Princeton Sentry’, and ‘Lakeview’ because there is no
reliable way to select a male plant from a seedling
until it fruits. It could take as long as 20 years or
more for Ginkgo to fruit.
Ginkgo may grow extremely slow for several
years after planting, but will then pick up and grow at
a moderate rate, particularly if it receives an adequate
supply of water and some fertilizer. But do not
overwater or plant in a poorly-drained area. Be sure
to keep turf several feet away from the trunk to help
trees become established. Very tolerant of urban soils
and pollution, Ginkgo could be used more in USDA
hardiness zone 7 but is not recommended in central
and southern Texas or Oklahoma due to summer heat.
Adapted for use as a street tree, even in confined soil
spaces. Some early pruning to form one central leader
is essential.
There are several cultivars: ‘Autumn Gold’ - male,
fruitless, bright gold fall color and rapid growth rate;
‘Fairmont’ - male, fruitless, upright, oval to pyramidal
form; ‘Fastigiata’ - male, fruitless, upright growth;
‘Laciniata’ - leaf margins deeply divided; ‘Lakeview’ -
male, fruitless, compact broad conical form; ‘Mayfield’
- male, upright fastigiate (columnar) growth; ‘Pendula’
- pendent branches; ‘Princeton Sentry’ - male, fruitless,
fastigiate, narrow conical crown for restricted overhead
spaces, popular, 65 feet tall, available in some
nurseries; ‘Santa Cruz’ - umbrella-shaped, ‘Variegata’
- variegated leaves.
Propagation is by seed or grafting males.
Pests and Diseases
This tree is pest-free and considered resistant to
gypsy moth.