Fact Sheet ST-283
November 1993
Gordonia lasianthus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Loblolly-Bay.
Loblolly-Bay1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native American, usually single-trunked,
evergreen tree, Loblolly-Bay reaches a height of 35 to
60 feet with a columnar or pyramidal, very open
growth habit (Fig. 1). The two to seven-inch-long,
glossy, dark green leaves are a light grey color on the
underside, giving a two-toned effect in the wind.
Although evergreen, several individual leaves at a time
will turn a brilliant scarlet color in the fall adding to
its attractiveness. The white, two to three-inch-wide,
five-petalled, cup-shaped flowers open from late spring
through summer and are very attractive but sparsely
produced throughout the canopy.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Gordonia lasianthus
Pronunciation: gor-DOE-nee-uh lay-zee-ANTH-us
Common name(s): Loblolly-Bay, Sweet-Bay
Family: Theaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: espalier; reclamation plant; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 60 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-283, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Gordonia lasianthus -- Loblolly-Bay Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrulate
Leaf shape: oblong; oblanceolate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; acidic; extended flooding
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Gordonia lasianthus -- Loblolly-Bay Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Loblolly-Bay.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Loblolly-Bay makes an attractive specimen
planting and its light, airy growth habit lends itself
well to smaller, partially enclosed locations. In moist
soils, Loblolly-Bay naturalizes well and is well-suited
to the low-maintenance landscape. Due to the shape
of the crown, it makes a suitable tree in urban areas
with restricted, narrow overhead space, and should do
well as a street tree, although it has not been
extensively used yet.
Preferring partial shade and moist soil, LoblollyBay can tolerate full sun only with sufficient moisture.
Loblolly-Bay has a shallow root system and will die if
not watered during periods of drought. It is found in
the wild most often growing in wet sites in the shade
of maples, cypress and pines. It is well-suited for
planting in boggy and other poorly drained soils. It is
not salt-tolerant. Not for dry climates.
Propagation is by seeds which germinate well after
stratification, or by cuttings.
The cultivar ‘Variegata’ has white and green
foliage, white flowers.
Pests
Pest problems are borers in weakened trees,
aphids, and caterpillars.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.