Fact Sheet ST-285
November 1993
Grevillea robusta
Figure 1. Middle-aged Silk-Oak.
Silk-Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Reaching a height of 75 feet or more with a 25-
foot spread, Silk-Oak is pyramidal to oval in shape,
eventually developing a few heavy horizontal limbs
and a thick trunk (Fig. 1). The light, ferny, grey-green
leaves, silvery beneath, are accented by large clusters
of bright yellow-orange flowers in spring. A great
quantity of leaves fall in the spring immediately
preceding the emergence of new growth and leaves
also fall sporadically throughout the year, creating
quite a litter problem to some people. Black, leathery
seed capsules follow the flowers.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Grevillea robusta
Pronunciation: grev-ILL-ee-uh roe-BUS-tuh
Common name(s): Silk-Oak
Family: Proteaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 100 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-285, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Grevillea robusta -- Silk-Oak Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: parted; revolute
Leaflet shape: lanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: orange; yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Grevillea robusta -- Silk-Oak Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Silk-Oak.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Silk-Oak works as a specimen in large, open
landscapes but probably should not be located near
houses due to their large size, messy habit, and the
brittleness of the wood as it ages. Tops of trees are
known to snap out of the tree in high winds. It is a
valuable timber tree in its native Australia, growing to
more than 125 feet tall.
Quick-growing Silk-Oak requires full sun and
sandy, well-drained soils to perform its best,
developing mushroom root rot in poorly-drained, wet
soils. Silk-Oak thrives in heat and is quite tolerant of
drought. It grows extremely well in southern
California where it easily reaches 100 feet tall. Tall
trees are often hit by lightning in Florida.
Propagation is by seed. For best results, extract
seed from mature, unopened follicles and plant
immediately.
Pests
Caterpillars.
Diseases
Mushroom root rot on poorly-drained soils.