Fact Sheet ST-286
November 1993
Guaiacum sanctum
Figure 1. Mature Lignumvitae.
Lignumvitae1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Lignumvitae is an extremely slow-growing
broadleaf evergreen which ultimately reaches 30 to 40
feet in height and casts light shade, but few people
have seen plants of this size because it is not grown in
the trade (Fig. 1). Most are seen 8 to 12 feet tall with
a beautiful array of multiple trunks and a rounded
canopy much like that of a mature Crape-Myrtle. The
one to two-inch-long, leathery, dark green leaves are
joined at many times throughout the year by the
production of large clusters of deep blue flowers, the
old flowers fading to a light silvery-blue and creating a
shimmering haze over the rounded canopy. These
flowers are followed by small, heart-shaped, yellow
berries, appearing on the tree at the same time as the
blue flowers and creating a lovely sight.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Guaiacum sanctum
Pronunciation: GWY-uh-kum SANK-tum
Common name(s): Lignumvitae
Family: Zygophyllaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking
lot islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 8 to 12 feet
Spread: 8 to 12 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-286, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Guaiacum sanctum -- Lignumvitae Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: blue
Flower characteristics: very showy; year round
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; tree wants
to grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 1.09
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Guaiacum sanctum -- Lignumvitae Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: good
Figure 3. Foliage of Lignumvitae.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Underneath the smooth, beige/grey bark of
Lignumvitae is some of the heaviest of all wood,
sinking under its weight instead of floating in water.
This dense wood was once popular for use in the
manufacture of bowling balls and has also been used
for propeller shafts on steamships, gears and for
mallets. The picturesque crooked, typically multiple
trunk, evergreen leaves, and beautiful flowers, and
fruit would all combine to make Lignumvitae a
popular choice for use as a container, patio, or
specimen planting if it were widely available in a
range of sizes. Unfortunately, like many other slowgrowing trees, this one is not often grown in nurseries.
One must travel to arboreta to view nice specimens of
this tree.
Lignumvitae can be grown in full sun or partial
shade on a wide variety of soils, including alkaline.
Plants will easily tolerate wet or dry soil, wind, and
salt, making it an ideal choice especially for seaside
plantings.
Guaiacum officinale grows 10 to 30 feet tall, has
blue or sometimes white flowers, and light to dark
brown seeds.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of concern.