Fact Sheet ST-287
November 1993
Gymnocladus dioicus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Kentucky Coffeetree.
Kentucky Coffeetree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This is a medium-growing tree that will reach a
height of about 70 feet while spreading 45 to 60 feet
(Fig. 1). The state tree of Kentucky should be used
more often because it is adaptable to many soils,
including alkaline, has interesting bark and grows with
an open canopy allowing light to penetrate to the
ground for adequate turf growth beneath the canopy.
The coarse branch texture in the winter is also quite
unique, forming an interesting silhouette of only
several large branches. Large seed pods hang on the
tree in the winter but can be a litter problem when
they fall in the spring. They are very hard and can be
‘shot’ from a lawnmower running over the fruit. Male
trees are sometimes available and they do not set fruit,
but this is often unreliable. The seeds (in a 5 to 10-
inch-long pod) and leaves may be poisonous to
humans. The pod contains seeds which used to be
roasted as a coffee substitute. The leaves are
bipinnately compound and can be up to 18 inches
long, resembling walnut.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Gymnocladus dioicus
Pronunciation: jim-NOCK-luh-dus dye-oh-EE-kuss
Common name(s): Kentucky Coffeetree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen; residential
street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-287, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Gymnocladus dioicus -- Kentucky Coffeetree Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 65 to 70 feet
Spread: 45 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; odd pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Gymnocladus dioicus -- Kentucky Coffeetree Page 3
Current year twig thickness: stout
Figure 3. Foliage of Kentucky Coffeetree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The trunk normally grows straight up through the
crown and is very strong. Branches grow at wide
angles to the trunk and are usually well-spaced along
the trunk. This configuration adds to the durability of
the tree. Be sure that major limbs are kept at less than
about half the diameter of the trunk to ensure that they
remain well-attached to the tree. The crown is round
or oval in youth, becoming more upright and oval with
age.
Some people object to the sparse branching when
this tree is young, but some pruning to create more
branches can help. Any shortcomings of the tree are
made up by the almost total lack of insect or disease
problems. Lawns grow well beneath the tree due to
the light shade cast by the thin, open canopy.
Kentucky Coffeetree is well-adapted to urban soil
and could be used more often and, like most trees,
does best when provided with irrigation until wellestablished. Amazingly tolerant of drought and poor
soil once established although it is native to rich
bottomland soil. Used as a street tree in some
communities. Be careful using the tree in a lawn since
the pods could become projectiles from mowing
equipment.
Male cultivars without fruit should be available
soon. These will be well-suited for planting along
streets.
Propagation is by seed, or grafting male plants.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.