Fact Sheet ST-291
November 1993
Halesia monticola
Figure 1. Middle-aged Mountain Silverbell.
Mountain Silverbell1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Mountain Silverbell grows into a 40-foot tree in its
natural habitat but is about 20 to 30 feet tall in
gardens and landscapes, with an upright-spreading
crown (Fig. 1). The tree prefers sandy loam and
begins blooming when only 10 to 12 feet tall. The
flowers are larger than those of Halesia carolina. The
white, bell-shaped blossoms are borne in clusters of up
to five. Flowering occurs along last years branches in
mid-spring on the previous season’s wood. Because
the flowers point downward, they are partially hidden
by the foliage and best viewed from below. Other
ornamental features are the yellow fall color and the
bark, which peels off in large, flat scales. The pale
yellow fruits are quite attractive as they hang down
from last years branches. Mountain Silverbell may
transplant poorly in the fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Halesia monticola
Pronunciation: hal-EE-zhee-uh mawn-tih-KOLE-uh
Common name(s): Mountain Silverbell
Family: Styracaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; specimen; residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-291, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Halesia monticola -- Mountain Silverbell Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; slightly alkaline; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
Halesia monticola -- Mountain Silverbell Page 3
trunk, or winter flowers
Figure 3. Foliage of Mountain Silverbell.
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree is interesting all year long, with
attractive medium green foliage, pretty flowers, showy
fruits, and exfoliating bark. It branches low to the
ground, making a nice lawn or specimen tree and
when pruned to one central leader can be used as a
street tree in residential areas in less than full-day sun.
The bark shows off nicely with foliage removed from
the lower branches, and multistemmed specimens
come-to-life when lit from below at nighttime.
An understory tree best suited for a partially
shaded or shaded location, silverbell prefers moist,
fertile soil with an accumulation of leaf litter and/or
mulch. Water during a drought and avoid compacted
soil.
One cultivar is listed: ‘Rosea’--pale pink flowers.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of serious concern,
occasionally leaf spot.