Fact Sheet ST-290
November 1993
Halesia diptera
Figure 1. Middle-aged Two-Winged Silverbell.
Two-Winged Silverbell1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Two-Winged Silverbell is a wonderful, small,
deciduous native tree, reaching 20 to 30 feet in height,
with a fairly dense, rounded silhouette when grown in
the full sun (Fig. 1). In its native habitat as an
understory tree along stream banks it appears more
open. Branches grow from the base of the tree
forming a multi-trunked tree suited for specimen or
patio planting. Although native to the deep south, it
is, unfortunately, known little and not grown by many
nurseries. In springtime, the trees produce a multitude
of beautiful, showy, bell-shaped white flowers which
are followed by two-winged, 1.5 to 2-inch-long drupes.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Halesia diptera
Pronunciation: hal-EE-zhee-uh DIP-ter-uh
Common name(s): Two-Winged Silverbell,
Snowdrop Tree
Family: Styracaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); near a deck or patio; narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-290, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Halesia diptera -- Two-Winged Silverbell Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Halesia diptera -- Two-Winged Silverbell Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Two-Winged Silverbell.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Two-Winged Silverbell is slowly gaining in
popularity for landscape use, and is ideal for
naturalizing in locations with moist soil. It is not
drought-tolerant and should always be located in a
protected spot sheltered from full day sun and wind.
Grows best with mulch beneath the entire canopy. It
makes a nice addition to the shaded shrub border with
its spring flower display and creates an excellent
understory tree beneath large natives. Use it as you
would Flowering Dogwood. Also used as a patio tree
for creating shade in a small, residential landscape.
Not a tree for planting in the open or along a street.
Two-Winged Silverbell should be located in partial
shade on very well-drained acid soil where leaf litter
and mulch are allowed to accumulate. It grows in full
sun in the north, adapts to almost total shade. It is not
adapted to clay.
Variety magniflora has larger flowers and is a
vigorous grower in the South.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. It is
amazingly pest free.