Fact Sheet ST-288
November 1993
Halesia carolina
Figure 1. Middle-aged Carolina Silverbell.
Carolina Silverbell1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A North American native tree, Carolina Silverbell
grows into a 20 to 40-foot-tall tree with a 15 to 30-
foot-spread and a pyramidal silhouette (Fig. 1). Some
horticulturists do not separate this from Halesia
monticola. The two to four-inch-long leaves turn
yellow in fall and are among the first to drop in
autumn. The tree prefers sandy loam and begins
blooming when only 10 to 12 feet tall. The white,
bell-shaped, showy blossoms are borne in two to fiveinch-long clusters. Flowering occurs along last year’s
branches in mid-May. Because the flowers point
downward, they are partially hidden by the foliage and
best viewed from below. Other ornamental features
are the yellow fall color and the bark, which peels off
in large, flat scales. The pale yellow fruits are quite
attractive as they hang down from last year’s branches.
Carolina Silverbell may transplant poorly in the fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Halesia carolina
Pronunciation: hal-EE-zhee-uh kair-oh-LYE-nuh
Common name(s): Carolina Silverbell
Family: Styracaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); near a deck or patio; narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 15 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; upright; vase shape
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-288, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Halesia carolina -- Carolina Silverbell Page 2
Crown density: moderate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Halesia carolina -- Carolina Silverbell Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Carolina Silverbell.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree is interesting all year long, with
attractive medium green foliage, pretty flowers, showy
fruits, and exfoliating bark. It branches low to the
ground, making a nice lawn or specimen tree and
when pruned to one central leader can be used as a
street tree in residential areas. The bark shows off
nicely with foliage removed from the lower branches,
and multistemmed specimens come-to-life when lit
from below at nighttime. It is a splendid small tree to
locate near a patio or deck.
An understory tree best suited for a partially
shaded or shaded location, Silverbell prefers moist,
fertile soil with an accumulation of leaf litter and/or
mulch. Water the tree during a drought and avoid
compacted soil.
Propagation is by seeds sown as soon as ripe or
stratified, and by layering, root cuttings, and
greenwood cuttings. Small trees and seedlings
transplant easily.
One cultivar is listed: ‘Rosea’, with pale pink
flowers.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.