Fact Sheet ST-294
November 1993
Hamamelis virginiana
Figure 1. Young Witch-Hazel.
Witch-Hazel1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Witch-Hazel grows best in sun or partial shade
and in light, moist soil (Fig. 1). The plant tolerates
some drought and grows slowly. It grows 20 to 30
feet tall and spreads 15 to 25 feet forming a
multistemmed, shrubby, round, somewhat
asymmetrical ball. Removing the lower branches
helps produce a more tree-form multistemmed
specimen but regular minor pruning will be required to
maintain it in this form since the plant suckers freely
from the base of the trunk.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Hamamelis virginiana
Pronunciation: ham-uh-MEE-liss ver-jin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Witch-Hazel
Family: Hamamelidaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-294, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Hamamelis virginiana -- Witch-Hazel Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; pleasant
fragrance; inconspicuous and not showy; winter
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Hamamelis virginiana -- Witch-Hazel Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Witch-Hazel.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The fragrant flowers are produced in late fall to
early winter and have straplike, yellow petals and is
the last shrub to flower during the year. The flowers
are more interesting than ornamental, however, there
are selections with more showy flowers. The fall color
is yellow and often is at its peak when the flowers are
out.
Plants are found along stream banks in the shade
in its native range where they appear open and poorly
branched. However, under cultivation in full or partial
sun they develop a fuller, rounded crown. Probably
not for clay soils. Although galls are frequently found
on the leaves, they are usually not serious pests on the
plant.
One cultivar is listed: ‘Rubescens’ - reddish petals.
Pests
Usually no pests are serious.
Saddled prominent is a green to brown or yellow
caterpillar with a reddish brown spot on its back. It
eats the leaves.
Witch-Hazel leaf gall aphid causes galls 1/2-inchlong. The galls are green, sometimes with reddish
tips, and are formed on the upper leaf surfaces. No
real lasting harm will be done by these galls. Natural
enemies usually control this insect; hand picking and
destroying infested leaves will also be helpful.
Horticultural oil applied before the plant grows may
help control this insect.
The spiny Witch-Hazel gall aphid causes galls 3/4-
inch-long with long, coarse spines. The galls are
green tinged with red. Both this aphid and the
previous one migrate to birch for part of their life
cycle. Spray with horticultural oil for some control.
Eastern tent caterpillar feeds on Witch-Hazel
leaves. Removing the nest by tearing out the web
and crushing the contents or pruning out the infested
branch will control the infestation.
Diseases
Usually no diseases are serious.
Several genera of fungi are listed as causing leaf
spot on Witch-Hazel but they will not require control.
Various genera of powdery mildew cause a white
coating on the leaves.