Fact Sheet ST-293
November 1993
Hamamelis mollis
Figure 1. Young Chinese Witch-Hazel.
Chinese Witch-Hazel1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chinese Witch-hazel is a small, slow-growing,
deciduous tree capable of reaching 20 feet high and
wide but is more often seen at 10 to 15 feet (Fig. 1).
The three to six-inch-long, dull, gray/green leaves will
usually put on a showy display in fall, as the dying
leaves change to shades of yellow and orange before
dropping. The long-lasting, showy, yellow flowers
appear in early spring and are quite fragrant.
However, they may occasionally be injured by cold
temperatures (-10 degrees F.). These blooms are
followed by the production of inconspicuous, green
(turning black) fruits which persist on the tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Hamamelis mollis
Pronunciation: ham-uh-MEE-liss MAW-liss
Common name(s): Chinese Witch-Hazel
Family: Hamamelidaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 20 feet
Spread: 12 to 18 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: spreading; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: obovate; orbiculate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-293, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Hamamelis mollis -- Chinese Witch-Hazel Page 2
Fall characteristic: showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Hamamelis mollis -- Chinese Witch-Hazel Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Witch-Hazel.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Plant Chinese Witch-Hazel near a deck or patio or
in the lawn or low ground cover as a specimen. Space
branches apart on a single trunk so they can properly
develop their horizontal, layered habit. The lowest
branch can be located one or two feet from the ground
to form a thick canopy all the way to the ground, or if
planted close to a walk or patio, five to seven feet up
to allow for pedestrian clearance beneath the crown.
Trees can also be purchased and trained with multiple
trunks for planting in open areas as specimens. This is
an attractive, versatile small tree which could be used
more in the urban landscape due to the small size and
ornamental habit.
Chinese Witch-Hazel should be grown in full sun
or partial shade on well-drained, moist, acid soils.
Trees grown in the partial shade are very nice,
developing an open crown, but do not become leggy
and unkempt like some other trees in partial shade.
Nice specimens can be found in clay soils, even those
which dry out for a period of time in the summer.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases appear to be serious, although
the plant has not been widely planted or tested.