Fact Sheet ST-295
November 1993
Hibiscus syriacus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Rose-of-Sharon.
Rose-of-Sharon1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Rose-of-Sharon is valued for large flowers
produced in summer when few other shrubs bloom
(Fig. 1). It is useful as a garden accent due to its
strict, upright habit. The open, loose branches and
light green leaves make Rose-of-Sharon ideally suited
to formal or informal plantings, and with a little
pruning makes an attractive, small specimen tree. The
plant grows in sun or partial shade and in any soil.
Rose-of-Sharon grows 8 to 10 feet tall and spreads 4
to 10 feet. The growth rate ranges from slow to
moderate, and transplanting is easy. Several roots are
usually located just beneath the soil surface.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Hibiscus syriacus
Pronunciation: high-BISS-kuss seer-ee-AY-kuss
Common name(s): Rose-of-Sharon, Shrub-Althea
Family: Malvaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; near a deck
or patio; trainable as a standard; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 8 to 12 feet
Spread: 4 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-295, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Hibiscus syriacus -- Rose-of-Sharon Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: dentate
Leaf shape: ovate; rhomboid
Leaf venation: pinnate; palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: blue; lavender; pink; purple; red; white
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Hibiscus syriacus -- Rose-of-Sharon Page 3
Drought tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of Rose-of-Sharon.
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The single or double flowers are in shades of red,
pink, white and purple, depending on the cultivar.
Individual flowers stay open for one day and close at
night. Since plants bloom on new growth, shaping or
pruning can be done at any time. However, pruning is
usually not required since the plant grows slowly and
keeps a tight upright form. Prune in late winter or
early spring in northern climates. Frequent severe
pruning gives fewer but larger flowers; no or little
pruning gives many smaller flowers.
Although tolerant of poor soils and drought in sun
or light shade, this upright, deciduous shrub requires
ample moisture to flower its best and to avoid leafdrop. Some protection from mid-day or afternoon sun
is beneficial for optimum plant appearance. Tolerance
to aerosol salt and wet soils combined with droughttolerance make this a fine plant for many landscapes.
Many cultivars are listed but few will be seen in
catalogs. Cultivars include: ‘Admiral Dewey’ - single,
white flowers; ‘Ardens’ - purple, semi-double flowers;
‘Bluebird’ - single, bluish purple flowers; ‘Boule de
Feu’ - double, purplish red flowers; ‘Coelestis’, single
violet blue with reddish purple throat; ‘Coerulis’ -
semi-double, light purple flowers; ‘Coerulis Plenus’ -
double, lavender flowers; ‘Diana’, with pure white
flowers, four to six inches in diameter, that stay open
at night; ‘Duc de Brabant’ - double, deep purplish pink
flowers; ‘Hamabo’ - single, pale pink flowers, with
reddish stripes halfway up the petals; ‘Jeanne d’Arc’ -
double, white flowers; ‘Lady Stanley’ - semi-double,
white flowers with bluish pink on each petal and red
lines running half way up the petal; ‘Leopoldii Plenus’
- double flowers, blushed pink; ‘Lucy’ - dark pink,
double flowers; ‘Mauve Queen’ - mauve flowers,
‘Paeoniflorus’ - double pink flowers; ‘Red Heart’,
single pure white flowers with deep red center;
‘Rubus’ - rose pink, single flowers, petals darker at the
base; ‘Souvenir de Charles Breton’ - semi-double, light
purple flowers; ‘Totus Albus’ - single, pure white
flowers; ‘Woodbridge’ - single flowers, reddish purple,
darker at the base.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
Although usually strong and easy to grow,
hibiscus can be bothered by aphids which accumulate
at the tips of stems, causing new growth to be
misshapen. Aphids may cover the leaves with sticky
honeydew. The insects can be dislodged with high
pressure water sprays from the garden hose or
controlled by pinching off the part of the twig with the
insects. Over-fertilizing increases aphid infestations.
In northern gardens, Japanese beetles are
particularly fond of the flowers.
Hibiscus syriacus -- Rose-of-Sharon Page 4
Diseases
If leaf spots are seen, pick off and destroy the
infected leaves.
If bacterial leaf spot causes problems, pick off and
destroy infected leaves.
Canker can kill branches or entire plants. Bright,
reddish-orange fruiting bodies may appear on the bark.
Prune out infected branches.
Flowers may be infected with a blight caused by a
fungus.
Bud drop can be caused by too much or too little
water or over fertilization.