Fact Sheet ST-296
November 1993
Hovenia dulcis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Japanese Raisintree.
Japanese Raisintree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Raisintree can reach 40 to 50 feet in
height but is most often seen at 30 to 35 feet with an
open, upright, oval silhouette (Fig. 1). Unfortunately
it is a little too big for planting beneath most power
lines. The tree usually maintains a fairly good central
leader with small-diameter main branches. The four to
six-inch-long, glossy green leaves are particularly
striking and create light shade below the trees but they
show no appreciable color change in autumn, dropping
while they are still green. In early summer, the
branch-tips of the trees are festooned with small, two
to three-inch-long cymes of sweetly-fragrant, greenishwhite flowers which are quite attractive to insects.
These blooms are followed by the production of small,
fleshy, brown drupes which ripen to bright red and
have a flavor similar to a sweet raisin, giving the tree
its common name.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Hovenia dulcis
Pronunciation: hoe-VEE-nee-ah DULL-sis
Common name(s): Japanese Raisintree
Family: Rhamnaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; shade tree; specimen; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-296, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Hovenia dulcis -- Japanese Raisintree Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 30 to 35 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Hovenia dulcis -- Japanese Raisintree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Raisintree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The bark of Japanese Raisintree is ridged and an
attractive light grey with brown valleys. Lower
branches can be removed or trimmed to display the
lovely bark. The trunk often grows straight up the
center of the tree without training.
The moderate growth rate, upright habit, and
striking flowers and fruit make Japanese Raisintree
useful as a specimen or container tree. It is a
candidate for trying as a street tree due to its small to
medium size and ascending branches, but has not yet
been extensively used for this purpose.
Trees will grow in almost any well-drained soil in
full sun or partial shade. Not for poorly-drained areas
or compacted soil, Japanese Raisintree prefers
adequate soil space for root exploration.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.