Fact Sheet ST-298
November 1993
Hydrangea paniculata
Figure 1. Mature Panicle Hydrangea.
Panicle Hydrangea1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This low-branching, multiple-trunked tree or large
shrub is fast-growing and capable of reaching 15 to 25
feet in height with a spread of 10 to 20 feet but is
often seen at about 10 feet (Fig. 1). The dark green,
deciduous leaves are three to six inches long and 1.5
to 3 inches wide, and fade only to a sickly yellow in
fall before dropping. The spectacular summertime
blooms appear in six to eight-inch-long panicles, the
cream-colored flowers gradually fading over time to
purplish-pink. The upright, spreading branches often
bend down with the weight of the blooms, and the
brown, faded blooms should be removed in late
September to keep the tree from looking unkempt. If
unpruned some people object to the pinkish brown
fruits and old flowers which hang on to the tree during
the winter. Pruning also is suggested to keep the plant
to a consistent, neat shape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Hydrangea paniculata
Pronunciation: high-DRAN-jee-uh
pan-ick-yoo-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Panicle Hydrangea
Family: Hydrangeaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; near
a deck or patio; screen; trainable as a standard;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 10 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-298, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Hydrangea paniculata -- Panicle Hydrangea Page 2
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: bowed; banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; pink
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Hydrangea paniculata -- Panicle Hydrangea Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Panicle Hydrangea.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Panicle Hydrangea can be used in a shrub border
as a large sized accent shrub. It may be best to locate
it away from the house due to its large size and
spreading habit. Lower branches can be pruned to
clean up the bottom of the plant and make it grow into
a multi-stemmed tree. Early training can create a
single-stemmed small tree which would be well suited
for planting as a specimen in a low ground cover or
lawn area. They are also suited for planting in aboveground containers for displaying the nice flowers
which develop in the summer.
Panicle Hydrangea should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained, moist, loamy soil.
Plants are fuller in the sun.
Propagation is by softwood cuttings which root
quickly in a medium of sand and peat.
Pests
Aphids, rose chafer, oystershell scale, two-spotted
mites, and nematodes.
Diseases
Bacterial wilt, bud blight, leaf spot, powdery
mildew, and rust.