Fact Sheet ST-299
November 1993
Ilex cassine
Figure 1. Middle-aged Dahoon Holly.
Dahoon Holly1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Attractive when tightly clipped into a tall screen or
allowed to grow naturally into its single-trunked, small
tree form, Dahoon Holly is ideal for a variety of
landscape settings (Fig. 1). Capable of reaching 40
feet in height, Dahoon Holly is usually seen at a
height of 20 to 30 feet with an 8 to 12-foot spread.
The smooth, supple, shiny dark green, evergreen
leaves, two to three inches long, have just a few
serrations near the tip. Possessing male and female
flowers on separate plants, at least two Dahoon Hollies
(male and female) must be planted in the landscape to
ensure production of the brilliant red berries in fall and
winter. The berries serve as an excellent food source
for wildlife but are far less prevalent than on East
Palatka or Fosters Holly.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ilex cassine
Pronunciation: EYE-lecks kuh-SIGH-nee
Common name(s): Dahoon Holly
Family: Aquifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
hedge; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; screen; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-299, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ilex cassine -- Dahoon Holly Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 8 to 12 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Ilex cassine -- Dahoon Holly Page 3
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Dahoon Holly.
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing well in full sun to partial shade, Dahoon
Holly does best on moist soils since the wet, boggy
soils of swamps is its native environment. Dahoon
Holly can tolerate drier locations with some watering,
but often has a thin crown in this environment. It is
not recommended in the southern part of its range in a
dry, exposed site unless irrigation is provided. It lends
itself well to use as a specimen or street tree, and is
ideal for naturalizing in moist locations. Little pruning
is needed to create a well-structured, strong tree. It
appears to adapt well to the confined spaces of urban
and downtown landscapes and is tolerant of some salt
spray. The crown is fuller in full sun.
Ilex cassine var. angustifolia, Alabama Dahoon,
has narrower, more linear leaves than the species and
more abundant but smaller berries. Ilex myrtifolia has
smaller leaves and fruit, and its cultivar ‘Lowei’ has
yellow berries and dark green foliage.
Propagation is by seeds, which germinate in one
year, or by cuttings. Cuttings are preferred since they
give plants of a known sex and also root easily.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. A twig
gall sometimes forms in response to a fungus
infection. Mites can infest foliage on trees planted on
dry sites.