Fact Sheet ST-311
November 1993
Ilex vomitoria
Figure 1. Middle-aged Yaupon Holly.
Yaupon Holly1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This upright, spreading small evergreen tree or
large shrub, capable of reaching 15 to 25 feet in height
with a similar spread, has small, grey-green, leathery
leaves densely arranged along smooth, stiff, light grey
branches (Fig. 1). Plants in the landscape require
about 10-years to develop a distinct vase-shape.
Sometimes clipped into a tight hedge, Yaupon Holly is
ideal for training into a small tree with lower branches
removed to reveal the interestingly-contorted multiple
trunks. It can also be used for topiaries, espaliers,
specimens, screens, or barriers. The non-showy male
and female flowers appear on separate plants and are
followed on the female plants by the production of
brilliant red berries (yellow on some cultivars) which
are quite attractive to wildlife. The flowers attract
bees for several weeks. Purchase plants with berries
on them (females) if you want a berry-producing plant,
or buy trees which were propagated from cuttings of
female plants.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ilex vomitoria
Pronunciation: EYE-lecks vom-ih-TOR-ee-uh
Common name(s): Yaupon Holly
Family: Aquifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
espalier; hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; screen; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-311, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ilex vomitoria -- Yaupon Holly Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrulate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Ilex vomitoria -- Yaupon Holly Page 3
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Yaupon Holly.
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
A tough native of the southern United States,
Yaupon Holly grows quickly in a variety of locations,
from full sun or shade to seaside or swamps, in sand
or clay. Crowns will be thin in the shade. It will
grow in soil with a pH in the 7’s and is very tolerant
of drought and sea salt, It sprouts readily from the
roots forming clumps of upright shoots beneath the
canopy. Sprouting is most troublesome if the soil
beneath the canopy is disturbed, as in planting shrubs
or flowers under the tree. These need to be pruned to
the ground two or three times each year to maintain a
neat appearance. Consider this when selecting trees
for use on streets, parking lots, and other lowmaintenance areas since thickets often form.
Yaupon Holly is one of the most durable and
adaptable of the small-leaved evergreen Hollies for use
in southern landscapes. It grows well throughout its
range in sidewalk cutouts and other sites with limited
exposed soil. Wild Yaupons are protected by Florida
statute.
A few of the available cultivars include:
‘Folsom’s Weeping’, similar to ‘Pendula’; ‘Jewel’,
female plant with heavy fruit production; ‘Nana’,
dwarf, compact shrub form, male plant, no berries;
‘Pendula’ (‘Grey’s Weeping’), large weeping
specimen, sparsely foliated, to 35 feet tall; ‘Pride of
Houston’, medium-sized shrub with heavy fruit
production; and a low shrub called ‘Schelling’s Dwarf’
(‘Stroke’s Dwarf’), more compact than ‘Nana’.
Yellow-fruited cultivars include: ‘Aureo’, yellow
berries; ‘Otis Miley’, small leaves, yellow fruit;
‘Wiggins’ Yellow’, yellow fruit.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings.
Pests
Scale, leaf miners, mites, aphids appear to form a
long list of problems, but none are normally serious.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.