Fact Sheet ST-302
November 1993
Ilex decidua
Figure 1. Middle-aged Possumhaw.
Possumhaw1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American tree is often seen as a
spreading 8 to 10-foot-high shrub but can also become
a 20-foot-tall tree when planted in partial shade (Fig.
1). Although the two to three-inch-long, dark green
leaves are deciduous they do not present any
appreciable fall color change. From March to May,
small white flowers appear among the leaves. These
blooms are followed by the production of small fruits
which become orange/red when they ripen in early
autumn. Since male trees will not fruit, be sure to
purchase females so you will not miss the abundant
fruit production. These fruits persist on the tree
throughout the winter and are quite showy against the
bare branches. After the fruits have been exposed to
freezing and thawing, they become a favorite food
source of many birds and mammals.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ilex decidua
Pronunciation: EYE-lecks dee-SID-yoo-uh
Common name(s): Possumhaw
Family: Aquifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-302, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ilex decidua -- Possumhaw Page 2
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Ilex decidua -- Possumhaw Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Possumhaw.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
These small trees grow with many thin, grey
trunks or stems arising from the ground in a clumping
fashion. There are so many of them and they are so
thick that they can act as a screen. Lower branches
are often removed to form a small tree with a tight
head of foliage along the outer portion of the crown.
Interior leaves are often shaded out and drop from the
tree. If lower branches are not removed, the plant
develops into a large, spreading mound of foliage.
Often found along stream banks in the wild,
Possumhaw tolerates wet soil and can be used to
stabilize stream banks. It can also be utilized as a
large accent shrub or small tree planted in a lawn area
as a specimen. Allow for plenty of room for this plant
to spread since they look their best when they develop
a symmetrical canopy.
Possumhaw should be grown in full sun or partial
shade on acid or alkaline, well-drained, moist soil.
They would make a good plant for water retention
ponds and other areas which regularly accumulate
water.
There are variety of cultivars developed for fruit
color, fruit persistence and tree habit including: ‘Byers
Golden’ - yellow fruit; Council Fire’ - persistent
orange-red fruit well into the winter; ‘Sentry’- hardy
only to zone 6, columnar habit makes it potentially
suited for planting in highway medians. There are
other cultivars.
Pests and Diseases
There do not appear to be many serious problems
affecting this tree.