Fact Sheet ST-303
November 1993
Ilex latifolia
Figure 1. Young Lusterleaf Holly.
Lusterleaf Holly1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This broad-leaved, evergreen tree can reach 40
feet in height with a 20 to 25-foot spread but is
usually seen at half that size (Fig. 1). The six-inchlong, glossy dark green, leathery leaves have serrate
margins and are unusually coarse-textured and large
for a Holly. The 0.25-inch-thick, newly emerging
green shoots add to the coarseness of this attractive
tree. New shoots droop under the weight of the
emerging leaves creating a full-crowned, round or
slightly pyramidal canopy. The inconspicuous,
yellowish-white spring flowers are followed by a
profusion of small, brick red berries (on female
plants), appearing in dense clusters, and persisting on
the plants throughout the winter. Both male and
female plants must be planted to ensure production of
the berries.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ilex latifolia
Pronunciation: EYE-lecks lat-ih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Lusterleaf Holly
Family: Aquifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; screen; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-303, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ilex latifolia -- Lusterleaf Holly Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate; spiny
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Ilex latifolia -- Lusterleaf Holly Page 3
Breakage: resistant
Figure 3. Foliage of Lusterleaf Holly.
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: stout; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Lusterleaf Holly can be clipped or can grow on its
own into a dense screen when located in bright light,
but has a more open crown in shade. This makes a
nice background plant in a shrub border in a large
landscape due to the dark green foliage. Other plants
contrast well when planted in front of it. Nurseries
can train the plant into a multistemmed specimen or
prune it to develop a single trunk for patio or street
tree use.
Lusterleaf Holly looks its best if planted in an area
receiving less than all-day sun and strong winds.
Some shading in the afternoon would be fine. Not for
exposed, windy, dry, full-sun areas, this Holly does
well in shaded locations. Fertile, well-drained but
moisture-retentive soils are best for this handsome
evergreen. Plants will require only occasional pruning
to maintain form and size and they can be espaliered
on a wall or fence quite easily. The bold foliage of
Lusterleaf Holly contrasts well with other plants and it
is also a striking specimen planting on its own. Clear
the inner portions of the branches of foliage and small
twigs and light the tree at night from below to create a
nice night-time specimen.
The cultivar ‘Wirt L. Winn’ is known for its
excellent form and foliage color.
Propagation is difficult. Hardwood cuttings taken
in fall and winter sometimes root. Seeds can take
several years to germinate. Plants are sometimes
grafted onto Ilex opaca seedlings.
Pests and Diseases
There is a caterpillar which occasionally chews
holes in the leafs.