Fact Sheet ST-309
November 1993
Ilex verticillata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Winterberry.
Winterberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Winterberry’s bright red, persistent berries provide
vibrant color in early winter after the leaves have
fallen off (Fig. 1). Plants in fruit appear to glow red.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ilex verticillata
Pronunciation: EYE-lecks ver-tiss-sill-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Winterberry
Family: Aquifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 6 to 10 feet
Spread: 5 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblanceolate; obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-309, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ilex verticillata -- Winterberry Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Ilex verticillata -- Winterberry Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Winterberry.
It grows 6 to 10 feet tall, spreads 5 to 10 feet on
thin, multistemmed branches, and grows slowly.
Branches and stems weep under the weight of the
foliage and berries creating a graceful, vase-shaped
symmetrical canopy. Young plants are somewhat
irregularly shaped. Winterberry is dioecious, so both
male and female plants are needed for fruit production.
The fruits of this native are often eaten by birds.
Use it in a shrub border or landscape as a
specimen, or any other area to attract birds. When
planted in turf as a specimen, be sure to keep the soil
under the canopy mulched so weeping stems and
branches can droop to display the nice form. If turf is
allowed to grow beneath the crown, it will thin due to
the dense shade and low branches will interfere with
mowing equipment. Little pruning is needed if the
plant is properly located to allow for its spread. The
plant grows in sun or partial shade in a rich, welldrained, acid soil, though it tolerates swampy areas.
Its tolerance to wet soil makes this a useful plant in
poorly-drained landscapes. It is not drought-tolerant.
Cultivars include: ‘Afterglow’ - bright red berries
and a heavy fruit set; ‘Chrysocarpa’ - yellow fruits;
‘Fastigiata’ - narrow, upright; ‘Nana’ - 3 1/2 feet tall,
large fruits; ‘Winter Red’ - dense branching, dark
foliage, heavy fruit production.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are serious.