Fact Sheet ST-480
October 1994
Pinus thunbergiana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Japanese Black Pine.
Japanese Black Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
An excellent, small, irregularly-shaped Pine, the
size and shape of Japanese Black Pine is variable
reaching a height of 25 feet and a spread of 20 to 35
feet (Fig. 1). The exceptionally dark green, five to
seven-inch-long twisted needles are borne in groups of
two. Although trees may or may not have a central
leader prune to develop one if the tree will be grown
to a large size. Branches are held horizontally in a
picturesque silhouette and sometimes can outgrow the
central leader forming an attractive multistemmed
specimen tree. It is probably best used in this way.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus thunbergiana
Pronunciation: PIE-nus thun-ber-jee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Japanese Black Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-480, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus thunbergiana -- Japanese Black Pine Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Pinus thunbergiana -- Japanese Black Pine Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Black Pine.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trunks are usually not straight but sweep up in a
gentle curve. It is often used as a specimen on smaller
properties, or is planted in groups on larger scale
landscapes. Space 10 to 20 feet apart for mass
planting or to create an open screen. Japanese Black
Pine can be successfully trained into a bonsai or small
specimen plant with selective pruning.
The plant tolerates dry, sandy soil and is
extremely salt tolerant, being used successfully along
beach front property in the full sun. It also grows well
in clay soil with a pH of 8.0. Drought tolerance is
good. May grow two to three feet in a year but this
rapid growth under optimum cultural conditions may
lead to the asymmetrical, open growth habit.
Propagation is by seed which germinate readily.
Pests
Usually none serious, except Pine wilt nematode
in the east and tip moth on recently transplanted Pines.
The Maskell scale has recently devastated large
numbers of trees in New Jersey.
Some adelgids will appear as white cottony
growths on the bark. All types produce honeydew
which may support sooty mold. European Pine shoot
moth causes young shoots to fall over. Infested shoots
may exude resin. The insects can be found in the
shoots during May. Pesticides are only effective when
caterpillars are moving from overwintering sites to
new shoots. This occurs in mid to late April or when
needle growth is about half developed.
Bark beetles bore into trunks making small holes
scattered up and down the trunk. The holes look like
shotholes. Stressed trees are more susceptible to
attack. Keep trees healthy.
Sawfly larvae caterpillars are variously colored but
generally feed in groups on the needles. Some sawfly
larvae will flex or rear back in unison when disturbed.
Sawflies can cause rapid defoliation of branches if left
unchecked.
Pine needle miner larvae feed inside needles
causing them to turn yellow and dry up.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
on the needles. Pine tortoise scale is brown and found
on twigs. Depending on the scale, horticultural oil
may control overwintering stages.
Pine spittle bug lives and hides in a foamy mass.
Zimmerman Pine moth larvae bore into the trunk.
The only outward symptoms may be death of parts of
the tree or masses of hardened pitch on the branches.
The larvae of Pine weevils feed on the sapwood of
the leaders. The leader is killed and the shoots
replacing it are distorted. First symptoms are pearl
white drops of resin on the leaders. The leaders die
when the shoot is girdled as adults emerge in summer.
Diseases
This pine is resistant to Diplodia tip blight.