Fact Sheet ST-317
November 1993
Jacaranda mimosifolia
Figure 1. Mature Jacaranda.
Jacaranda1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Soft, delicate, fernlike, deciduous foliage and
dense terminal clusters of lavender-blue, lightly
fragrant, trumpet-shaped flowers make this large,
spreading tree an outstanding specimen planting (Fig.
1). The striking blooms can appear any time from
April through August (most often May), and are
sometimes present before the fresh, new, light green
leaves appear in spring. Flowering is reportedly best
following a winter with several nights in the upper
30’s. Jacaranda may flower best when grown in poor
soil. Jacarandas can reach 25 to 40 feet in height with
an equal or greater spread, and the bent or arching
trunks are covered with light grey bark.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Jacaranda mimosifolia
Pronunciation: jack-uh-RAN-duh
mih-moe-sih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Jacaranda
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 45 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: spreading; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-317, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Jacaranda mimosifolia -- Jacaranda Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; odd pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: obovate; rhomboid
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender; purple
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; summer flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Jacaranda mimosifolia -- Jacaranda Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Jacaranda.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The light, dappled shade makes Jacaranda wellsuited for cooling patios, but it probably should not be
used near pools due to the abundant leaf and flower
drop. Jacaranda makes an ideal street tree, creating a
spectacular sight when in full bloom. The arching
branch habit is ideal for creating a canopy over a street
or boulevard. Be sure to plant only those trees which
have one central trunk and major limbs well-spaced
apart for street tree and other high-use areas.
Unpruned trees can become hazardous as they split
apart at the crotches. Once properly trained and
pruned, Jacaranda is fairly strong-wooded and less
messy than Royal Poinciana.
Heaviest-flowering when grown in full sun, small
trees of Jacaranda can tolerate light shade and will
grow quickly. They thrive in sandy, well-drained soils
but should be watered during dry periods. Prune
branches so they remain less than half the diameter of
the trunk to help keep the plant intact and increase
durability.
‘Alba’ is a white-flowered cultivar which has a
longer blooming period but sparser blooms. There are
other cultivars available.
Propagation is by softwood cuttings, grafting, or
by seed. Seedlings often take a long time to bloom so
grafted trees or those rooted from cuttings are
preferred.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Mushroom root rot is a problem on poorly-drained
soil.