Fact Sheet ST-319
November 1993
Jatropha integerrima
Figure 1. Middle-aged Peregrina.
Peregrina1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This slender-stemmed, multi-trunked tropical
evergreen tree or large shrub, a native of Cuba,
reaches 15 feet in height with an equal spread, and has
unusual seven-inch-long leaves varying in shape from
oblong, fiddle-shaped, or even-lobed (Fig. 1). The
one-inch-wide red flowers are produced year-round in
beautiful clusters held upright above the foliage and
helps make Fire-cracker an interesting specimen plant.
The seed capsules which follow hold several smooth,
speckled, and toxic seeds, a fact which must be
considered when placing this plant in the landscape; it
should be kept out of the reach of children.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Jatropha integerrima
Pronunciation: jat-ROE-fuh in-teh-GAIR-rih-muh
Common name(s): Peregrina, Fire-Cracker
Family: Euphorbiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; trainable as a standard; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-319, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Jatropha integerrima -- Peregrina Page 2
Leaf venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: showy; year round flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Jatropha integerrima -- Peregrina Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Peregrina.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Jatropha makes a delightful red-flowered accent in
a shrub border planted to attract attention to an area.
It flowers nearly year round and so is quite popular as
a patio tree or garden accent. Multiple trunks and
stems originate near the ground forming a
symmetrical, weeping clump of thinly-clothed
branches. The tree can be staked and trained to grow
with one trunk for two or three feet. This is a nice
way to display the plant as an accent or specimen. Do
not expect this small tree to provide shade, but it will
attract hummingbirds and butterflies.
Peregrina should be grown in full sun or partial
shade on well-drained soil. Full sun plants flower
best. It is not salt-tolerant.
There is a pink-flowered form available at some
nurseries.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
occasionally bothered by mites, scales, and superficial
leaf miner.