Fact Sheet ST-320
November 1993
Juglans nigra
Figure 1. Middle-aged Black Walnut.
Black Walnut1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Black Walnut grows with a rounded crown to
about 70 feet (can reach 100 to 150 feet in the woods)
and spreads 60 to 80 feet when open grown (Fig. 1).
Best growth occurs in a sunny open location and a
moist rich soil, common along stream banks in its
native habitat. The tree grows rapidly when young but
slows down with age and develops with a number of
massive branches well spaced along the trunk forming
a very strong, durable tree. While valued as a lumber
tree it may not make the best yard tree. The nuts are
edible but are a nuisance to clean up and leaves often
fall prematurely from some type of leaf disease.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Juglans nigra
Pronunciation: JOO-glanz NYE-gruh
Common name(s): Black Walnut
Family: Juglandaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 70 feet
Spread: 50 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-320, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Juglans nigra -- Black Walnut Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.55
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
Juglans nigra -- Black Walnut Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Black Walnut.
Black Walnut roots contain juglone which inhibits
growth of some plants beneath the tree. Plants such as
tomato and evergreens are quite sensitive to juglone.
Trees produce a strong tap root on well-drained loose
soils and recover poorly after transplanting. Trees
with trunks to five feet in diameter can be found in the
eastern part of the country. A yellow dye is made
from the fruit husks. The seed is used in candymaking, cleaning abrasives and explosives.
The tree is probably best used in a park, campus
or other open space area. However, the fruit is very
hard and can dull a lawn mower blade quickly and a
mower can ‘shoot’ the fruit across a lawn at a high
rate of speed, possibly injuring people in the area.
Place the tree so it will receive an adequate supply
of water. It is not drought tolerant, often dropping
leaves in dry spells and is poorly adapted for urban
soils. It is really most happy in the loose gravely soil
of stream banks and other undisturbed areas but
tolerates alkaline and wet soil.
One cultivar is listed: ‘Laciniata’ - a beautiful tree
with cut leaflets. Other cultivars exist for nut quality.
Juglans microcarpa is recommended for the central
part of the country and western parts of Oklahoma and
Texas. Juglans regia is the tree that brings us the
edible walnut.
Pests
Fall webworm larvae web over branches then feed
on leaves inside the nest. Nests can be pruned out of
small trees or use sprays of Bacillus thuringiensis.
Tent caterpillars also eat foliage in the spring.
Scales of various types attack walnuts. Most
scales can usually be controlled with horticultural oil
applied.
The leaves may be eaten by any one of several
caterpillars. These can be controlled with sprays once
identified.
Mites cause speckling and yellowing of the leaves.
Diseases
Brown leaf spot or anthracnose symptoms are
irregular dark brown spots occurring in early summer.
Severely infected trees may be defoliated. Rake up
and destroy infected, fallen leaves.
Canker diseases cause dieback or death of trees.
Infected bark may be discolored, sunken, or have a
different appearance than surrounding healthy bark.
Prune out infected branches and keep trees healthy. If
the canker girdles the trunk the tree dies.
Bacterial blight causes small, irregularly-shaped
spots on the leaves and leaf stems. Black spots occur
on young nuts and shoots. Nearly ripe nuts have large
black spots on the husks. Infected nuts fall
prematurely or may have husks, shells, and kernels
blackened and ruined.
Powdery mildew causes a white coating on the
leaves.
During periods of high temperature and drying
winds, walnuts may scorch. Make sure plants have
adequate soil moisture.