Fact Sheet ST-326
November 1993
Juniperus silicicola
Figure 1. Middle-aged Southern Redcedar.
Southern Redcedar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This densely-foliated, wide pyramidal, columnar or
oval evergreen grows fairly quickly, ultimately
reaching heights up to 40 feet with a 25-foot spread
(Fig. 1). Some individual plants grow wider than tall
as they grow older. Some botanists do not make a
distinction between Juniperus silicicola and Juniperus
virginiana. Its fine-textured, medium green leaves and
drooping branchlets help to soften the rather
symmetrical, oval juvenile form. Mature specimens of
Southern Redcedar take on a flat-topped, almost
windswept appearance, making them very picturesque.
Bark and trunk on older specimens take on a
delightful, ‘old-tree’ look.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Juniperus silicicola
Pronunciation: joo-NIP-er-us sill-liss-sih-KOLE-uh
Common name(s): Southern Redcedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; residential street tree; Christmas tree;
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-326, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Juniperus silicicola -- Southern Redcedar Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 30 to 45 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; oval; pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; terminal spine
Leaf shape: awl-like; scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Juniperus silicicola -- Southern Redcedar Page 3
Current year twig thickness: thin
Figure 3. Foliage of Southern Redcedar.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The dense growth and attractive foliage make
Southern Redcedar a favorite for windbreaks, screens,
and wildlife-cover for large-scale landscapes. Its high
salt-tolerance makes it ideal for seaside locations.
Redcedar can make a nice Christmas tree, and the
fragrant wood is popular for repelling insects. Cedar
Key, Florida, once had extensive redcedar forests
before the lumber was extensively harvested and the
wood used for chests and pencils. Although not
currently used often as a street tree, its wood is strong,
the foliage is clean, and the fruit is small making it a
suitable candidate. There are some nice examples of
street tree use in southern cities. With proper pruning
to remove lower branches, it should adapt well to
street-scapes.
Planted in full sun or partial shade, Southern
Redcedar will easily grow on a variety of soils,
including clay. Growth may be poor in landscapes
which are over-irrigated. Plants are difficult to
transplant due to a coarse root system, except when
quite small. Water until well-established and then
forget about the tree. It performs admirably with no
care, even on alkaline soil and along the coast.
Usually insects and diseases are not a problem if
grown in the full sun. There may be local restrictions
on planting this tree near apple orchards because it is
the alternate host for cedar-apple rust.
Propagation is by seed, which germinate faster if
planted as soon as the cones mature or if given a
stratification period. Also, tip cuttings can be rooted.
No cultivars are listed but there is ample
opportunity to propagate and culture from the wide
diversity of shapes and growth habits exhibited by this
tree.
Pests
Usually none are serious.
Bagworm caterpillars web foliage and debris
together to make bags up to two inches long. The
insects live in the bags and emerge to feed on the
foliage. Use sprays of Bacillus thuringiensis. The
insects can also be picked off the plants by hand.
Juniper scale causes yellowed needles, and
infected branches fail to produce new growth. The
Juniperus silicicola -- Southern Redcedar Page 4
scale is round and at first white, later turning gray or
black.
The Juniper webworm webs twigs and needles
together, causing them to brown and die. The larva is
1/2-inch-long and is brown with darker stripes. The
larvae are often in the densest part of the plant and can
go unnoticed.
Mites cause stippled and bronzed foliage.
Diseases
Twig blights cause death and browning of twigs
tips. The diseases may progress down the stem killing
the whole branch. Small lesions may be seen at the
base of dead tissue. Prune out dead branch tips.
Dieback from Kabatina blight appears in early spring,
from Phomopsis in summer.
Three rust diseases seen most often are
cedar-apple rust, hawthorn rust, and quince rust. The
most common is cedar-apple rust. On Juniper the
disease forms galls and orange jelly-like horns in
spring. The horns are most likely to form following
periods of rainy, warm weather. Spores formed in the
horns infect the alternate host. The diseases are more
serious on the alternate host than Juniper. A
separation of a few hundred yards may help avoid the
disease. Prune out the spore horns when seen in the
spring.
Junipers are not tolerant of ice coatings. Expect
dieback when Junipers are covered with ice for several
days. Removing the ice is impractical.