Fact Sheet ST-324
November 1993
Juniperus scopulorum
Figure 1. Young Rocky Mountain Juniper.
Rocky Mountain Juniper1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Juniperus scopulorum is a native plant that can be
found in the western United States (Fig. 1). In
general, Juniperus scopulorum is a slow growing
evergreen tree with a narrow, pyramidal habit that
grows to a mature height of 30 to 40 feet. It is similar
to other Junipers in that it requires a full sun exposure
and will tolerate dry and droughty soils. Juniperus
scopulorum is useful as a privacy screen or specimen.
This Juniper is difficult to grow in the south due to
disease problems. If you try it, provide excellent
drainage and keep the foliage dry.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Juniperus scopulorum
Pronunciation: joo-NIP-er-us skop-yoo-LOR-um
Common name(s): Rocky Mountain Juniper,
Colorado Redcedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-324, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Juniperus scopulorum -- Rocky Mountain Juniper Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; terminal spine
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Juniperus scopulorum -- Rocky Mountain Juniper Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
There are many cultivars of this plant available to
consumers due to the efforts of nursery operators.
Only a small sample of their variability will be
presented here. ‘Gray Gleam’ - silvery gray foliage,
pyramidal, slow growing to 15 feet in 30 years;
‘Skyrocket’ - very narrow columnar growth, bluish
green foliage. After the plant reaches about 15 feet
tall (after about 10 to 15 years) it is subject to bending
of the lateral branches, some to the ground, ruining its
form. ‘Table Top’ - semi-upright, flat-topped growth
habit, silvery gray foliage, five feet high in 10 years;
‘Wichita Blue’ - bright blue cast to foliage, pyramidal
form.
Pests
Bagworm caterpillars web foliage and debris
together to make bags up to two inches long. The
insects live in the bags and emerge to feed on the
foliage. Use sprays of Bacillus thuringiensis. The
insects can also be picked off the plants by hand.
Juniper scale causes yellowed needles, and
infected branches fail to produce new growth. The
scale is round and at first white, later turning gray or
black.
The Juniper webworm webs twigs and needles
together, causing them to brown and die. The larva is
1/2-inch-long and is brown with darker stripes. The
larvae are often in the densest part of the plant and can
go unnoticed.
Mites cause stippled and bronzed foliage.
Diseases
Twig blight causes death and browning of twigs
tips. The disease may progress down the stem killing
the whole branch. Small lesions may be seen at the
base of dead tissue. Prune out dead branch tips.
Three rust diseases seen most often are
cedar-apple rust, hawthorn rust, and quince rust.
Cedar-apple is the most common. On Juniper the
disease forms galls and orange jelly-like horns in
spring. The horns are most likely to form following
periods of rainy, warm weather. Spores formed in the
horns infect the alternate host. The diseases are more
serious on the alternate host than Juniper. A
separation of a few hundred yards may help avoid the
disease. Prune out the spore horns when seen in the
spring.
Junipers are not tolerant of ice coatings. Expect
dieback when Junipers are covered with ice for several
days. Removing the ice is impractical.