Fact Sheet ST-327
November 1993
Juniperus virginiana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Eastern Redcedar.
Eastern Redcedar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Redcedar is an evergreen growing 40 to 50 feet
tall in an oval, columnar, or pyramidal form (very
diverse) and spreading 8 to 15 feet when given a
sunny location (Fig. 1). It develops a brownish tint in
winter in the north and is sometimes used in
windbreaks or screens. The fruit is a blue berry on
female trees and is ornamental when produced in
quantity. Birds devour the fruit and ‘plant’ it along
farm fences and in old abandoned fields. Some
botanists do not separate J. virginiana from silicicola.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Juniperus virginiana
Pronunciation: joo-NIP-er-us ver-jin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Eastern Redcedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; residential street tree; Christmas tree;
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 10 to 20 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-327, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Juniperus virginiana -- Eastern Redcedar Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; terminal spine
Leaf shape: awl-like; scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Juniperus virginiana -- Eastern Redcedar Page 3
Current year twig color: brown; green
Figure 3. Foliage of Eastern Redcedar.
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.47
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The dense growth and attractive foliage make
Eastern Redcedar a favorite for windbreaks, screens,
and wildlife-cover for large-scale landscapes. Its high
salt-tolerance makes it ideal for seaside locations.
Redcedar can make a nice Christmas tree, and the
fragrant wood is popular for repelling insects.
Although not currently used often as a street tree, its
wood is strong, the foliage is clean, and the fruit is
small making it a suitable candidate. There are some
nice examples of street tree use in southern cities.
With proper pruning to remove lower branches, it
should adapt well to street-scapes.
Planted in full sun or partial shade, Eastern
Redcedar will easily grow on a variety of soils,
including clay, but will not do well on soils kept
continually moist. Growth may be poor in landscapes
which are over-irrigated. Plants are difficult to
transplant due to a coarse root system, except when
quite small. Water until well-established and then
forget about the tree. It performs admirably with no
care, even on alkaline soil and along the coast.
Usually insects and diseases are not a problem if
grown in the full sun. There may be local restrictions
on planting this tree near apple orchards because it is
the alternate host for cedar-apple rust.
Some nurseries carry a cultivar or two of redcedar.
Cultivars include: ‘Burkii’ - pyramidal, blue
foliage, 15 to 25 feet tall; ‘Canaertii’ - compact,
pyramidal, good fruit production, fairly common in
Texas; ‘Hillspire’ - (cupressifolia) - good green color;
‘Elegantissima’ - Goldtip Redcedar - branchlets with
yellow tips, less than 20 feet tall; ‘Filifera’ -
pyramidal, branchlets divided, foliage gray green;
‘Glauca’ - Silver Redcedar - narrow, columnar, 15 to
20 feet tall, silvery blue foliage especially in spring;
‘Ketlerii’ is commonly available in the mid-west, is
more open with spaces between branches at the top of
the tree, pyramidal; ‘Manhattan Blue’ - compact, 20
feet tall, pyramidal, foliage bluish green; ‘Pendula’ -
Weeping Redcedar - branchlets pendulous, to 40 feet
tall; ‘Pyramidalis Dundee’ - pyramidal, purplish green
in winter; ‘Skyrocket’ - silver-blue foliage, narrow
columnar form.
Juniperus virginiana -- Eastern Redcedar Page 4
Pests
Usually none are serious.
Bagworm caterpillars occasionally web foliage and
debris together to make bags up to two inches long.
The insects live in the bags and emerge to feed on the
foliage. Use sprays of Bacillus thuringiensis. The
insects can also be picked off the plants by hand.
Juniper scale causes yellowed needles, and
infected branches fail to produce new growth. The
scale is round and at first white, later turning gray or
black.
The Juniper webworm webs twigs and needles
together, causing them to brown and die. The larva is
1/2-inch-long and is brown with darker stripes. The
larvae are often in the densest part of the plant and can
go unnoticed.
Mites cause stippled and bronzed foliage.
Diseases
Twig blights cause death and browning of twigs
tips. The diseases may progress down the stem killing
the whole branch. Small lesions may be seen at the
base of dead tissue. Prune out dead branch tips.
Dieback from Kabatina blight appears in early spring,
from Phomopsis in summer.
Three rust diseases seen most often are
cedar-apple rust, hawthorn rust, and quince rust. The
most common is cedar-apple rust. On Juniper the first
two diseases form galls and orange jelly-like horns in
spring. The horns are most likely to form following
periods of rainy, warm weather. Spores formed in the
horns infect the alternate host. The diseases are more
serious on the alternate host than Juniper. There may
be local restrictions on planting this tree near apple
orchards because it is the alternate host for cedar-apple
rust. A separation of a few hundred yards may help
avoid the disease. Prune out the spore horns when
seen in the spring. Do not plant near hawthorns,
apples, or crabapples.
Junipers are not tolerant of ice coatings. Expect
dieback when Junipers are covered with ice for several
days. Removing the ice is impractical.