Fact Sheet ST-321
November 1993
Juniperus ashei
Figure 1. Mature Ashe Juniper.
Ashe Juniper1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This multi-stemmed, native North American tree
reaches 35 to 40 feet in height and has fragrant,
resinous leaves (Fig. 1). Although the flowers are
small and insignificant, the fruits which follow, ripen
in August and September into a large, blue, berry-like
cone which is relished by wildlife. The bark of Ashe
Juniper peels off in long, thin strips, which are used by
birds for nesting material. The wood of Ashe Juniper
is strong enough to have been used for posts and
poles.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Juniperus ashei
Pronunciation: joo-NIP-er-us ASH-ee-eye
Common name(s): Ashe Juniper, Mountain-Cedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; specimen; residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-321, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Juniperus ashei -- Ashe Juniper Page 2
Crown density: open
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: terminal spine
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; gray; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Juniperus ashei -- Ashe Juniper Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It can be found growing with a single trunk or in
clumps. It is probably best used in landscapes which
are not irrigated since it is susceptible to Juniper
blight. Many locations in the eastern part of the
country are too humid to successfully grow this tree.
It is most often found in the west and in the drier parts
of Texas and Oklahoma.
Ashe Juniper should be grown in full sun on welldrained soil and easily tolerates alkaline soil.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Juniper blight can cause leaf discoloration and
defoliation. Ashe Juniper is reportedly resistant to
Cedarapple rust.