Fact Sheet ST-335
November 1993
Kalopanax pictus
Figure 1. Mature Castor-Aralia.
Castor-Aralia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
With massive, spreading branches and large, 7 to
12-inch-diameter, dark green, multi-lobed leaves,
Castor-Aralia provides dense shade below its canopy
and makes an ideal shade tree (Fig. 1). Growing 40 to
50 feet high with an equal spread, Castor-Aralia is
deciduous, the leaves turning a faint red in fall before
dropping. While the young stems are armed with
short, yellow prickles, the mature trunk is attractively
ridged and blackened. The one-inch-diameter, white
flowers appear in dense, 12 to 24-inch-long terminal
panicles and attract quite a few bees. This is not a
problem on larger specimens since flowers are borne
up in the tree away from the ground. The small black
fruit which ripens in early fall is eagerly consumed by
birds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Kalopanax pictus
Pronunciation: kal-oh-PAN-acks PICK-tus
Common name(s): Castor-Aralia, Prickly Castor-Oil
Tree
Family: Araliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); shade tree;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-335, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Kalopanax pictus -- Castor-Aralia Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red; yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no significant
litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Kalopanax pictus -- Castor-Aralia Page 3
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
Figure 3. Foliage of Castor-Aralia.
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree could be planted more often in
landscapes, but seeds germinate readily in the
landscape. Use it with caution near open fields and
wetlands. The large size and coarse texture probably
make it best suited for large-scale landscapes, such as
golf courses, parks, business complexes and campuses,
but it could be tried along streets where there is plenty
of soil space for root expansion.
Castor-Aralia should be grown in full sun on welldrained soil and will tolerate alkaline soil. While
drought-tolerant once established, Castor-Aralia should
receive ample moisture until then. Any pruning
should be done in late spring, and Castor-Aralia is
considered a long-lived tree.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.