Fact Sheet ST-337
November 1993
Koelreuteria elegans
Figure 1. Middle-aged Flamegold.
Flamegold1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A yellow carpet of fallen petals, delicate leaflets
which cast a mosaic of welcoming shade year round,
and large clusters of persistent rose-colored, papery
capsules all help to make Flamegold a very popular
landscape tree (Fig. 1). This broad-spreading,
evergreen tree reaches a height of 35 to 45 feet and
eventually takes on a flat-topped, somewhat irregular
silhouette. It is often used as a patio, shade, street, or
specimen tree. The small, fragrant, yellow flowers
appear in very showy, dense, terminal panicles in early
summer, and are followed in late summer or fall by
large clusters of the two-inch-long "Chinese lanterns".
These papery husks are held above the evergreen
foliage and retain their pink color after drying and are
very popular for use in everlasting flower
arrangements. The bark is smooth and light brown
when young, becoming ridged and furrowed as the tree
matures. Easily distinquished from Koelreuteria
paniculata since Koelreuteria elegans has twice
compound leaves, whereas Koelreuteria paniculata has
single pinnate compound leaves; different from
Koelreuteria bipinnata only in the fact that
Koelreuteria elegans is evergreen.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Koelreuteria elegans
Pronunciation: kole-roo-TEER-ee-uh ELL-eh-ganz
Common name(s): Flamegold
Family: Sapindaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); specimen; residential street tree;
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-337, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Koelreuteria elegans -- Flamegold Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 50 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound
Leaflet margin: incised; serrate
Leaflet shape: oblong; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: pink
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Koelreuteria elegans -- Flamegold Page 3
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
Figure 3. Foliage of Flamegold.
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trees need to be trained when young to develop a
strong branch structure. Spacing main branches apart
along a central trunk is crucial to developing a durable
tree. As soon as you see them, remove any double or
multiple trunks which develop, especially if they have
embedded or pinched bark in the branch crotch. Be
sure to locate the first major branch high enough off
the ground so that drooping leaves and branchlets will
not get in the way of traffic below. Train major
branches so they grow up and out, spreading from the
trunk to create the clearance needed for street tree or
parking lot planting.
The wood is fairly weak and branches can break
in strong wind storms, but the tree definitely has a
place in many landscapes. Planted in a full sun
location, Flamegold makes a moderately dense shade
tree, but there is considerable variation among
individuals of the species. Properly pruned and trained
trees can be planted as street or parking lot trees, but
do not commit large areas to this tree due to the
possibility of them breaking up as they reach about 30
years old. They will be the source of many
compliments when they are in flower and fruit. Dead
wood periodically forms and must be removed to
maintain a neat appearance.
Flamegold is a tough tree which should be grown
in full sun on any well-drained soil, in sand or heavy
clay, and should receive moderate watering. The tree
becomes leggy and thin in partial shade. When wellestablished, Chinese flame tree will tolerate air
pollution, heat, and drought. Tolerant of alkaline soil
pH, it does well in many parts of the Deep South
where soils are often calcareous.
Propagation is by seed, which will germinate
within six to eight days.
Pests and Diseases
Scale, mushroom root rot on wet soil or on old
trees. A canker causes dead and sunken areas on the
bark. Coral pink fruiting bodies develop on the
diseased bark. Prune out infected branches and
fertilize to maintain tree health.
Verticillium wilt attacks Koelreuteria. The disease
causes wilting and death of leaves on infected
branches. Eventually the entire tree may be killed.
Fertilize to stimulate growth. There are no chemical
controls.