Fact Sheet ST-338
November 1993
Koelreuteria paniculata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Goldenraintree.
Goldenraintree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Goldenraintree grows 30 to 40 feet tall with an
equal spread, in a broad, somewhat irregular globeshape (Fig. 1). Some trees appear vase-shaped.
Although it has a reputation for being weak wooded, it
is rarely attacked by pests and grows in a wide range
of soils, including high pH soils. Goldenraintree
tolerates dryness and casts little shade because of the
open growth habit. It makes a good street or parking
lot tree, particularly where overhead or soil space is
limited, due to its adaptive abilities. The tree grows
moderately and bears large panicles of bright yellow
flowers in May (USDA hardiness zone 9) to July
(USDA hardiness zone 6) when few other trees bloom.
It is not as showy as Koelreuteria bipinnata but is
much more cold-tolerant. The seed pods look like
brown chinese lanterns and are held on the tree well
into the fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Koelreuteria paniculata
Pronunciation: kole-roo-TEER-ee-uh
pan-ick-yoo-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Goldenraintree, Varnish-Tree
Family: Sapindaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; shade tree; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-338, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Koelreuteria paniculata -- Goldenraintree Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound; odd pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: lobed; incised; serrate
Leaflet shape: oblong; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2
inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Koelreuteria paniculata -- Goldenraintree Page 3
Current year twig color: brown
Figure 3. Foliage of Goldenraintree.
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The root system is coarse with only a few but
large roots, so transplant when young or from
containers. Do not transplant in the fall as success
rate is reportedly limited. Considered a city tolerant
tree due to tolerance to air pollution and ability to
withstand drought, heat and alkaline soils. It also
tolerates some salt spray but requires well-drained soil.
It would be hard to find a more adaptive yellow
flowering tree for urban planting. It makes a nice
patio tree, creating light shade but its brittle wood can
break easily in windy weather.
The tree has only a few branches when it is young
and some pruning to increase branchiness helps sell
the tree. Prune the tree early to space major branches
along the trunk to create a strong branch structure and
the tree will be longer-lived and require little
maintenance. Dead wood is often present in the
canopy and should be removed periodically to
maintain a neat appearance. Only single-stemmed
trees trained in the nursery with well-spaced branches
should be planted along streets and parking lots.
One cultivar is listed; ‘Fastigiata’ - upright growth
habit.
Pests
Occasional attacks by scale may be seen. Sprays
of horticultural oil control overwinter stages. Boxelder
bug can be a menace.
Diseases
Koelreuteria is subject to few diseases. A canker
causes dead and sunken areas on the bark. Coral pink
fruiting bodies develop on the diseased bark. Prune
out infected branches and fertilize to maintain tree
health.
Verticillium wilt attacks Koelreuteria. The disease
causes wilting and death of leaves on infected
branches. Eventually the entire tree may be killed.
Fertilize to stimulate growth. There are no chemical
controls.