Fact Sheet ST-336
November 1993
Koelreuteria bipinnata
Figure 1. Young Chinese Flame-Tree.
Chinese Flame-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A yellow carpet of fallen petals, delicate leaflets
which cast a mosaic of welcoming shade, and large
clusters of persistent rose-colored, papery capsules all
help to make Chinese Flame-Treetree a very popular
landscape tree over a wide area of the south (Fig. 1).
One of only a few yellow-flowering trees for the midand deep-south landscape. This broad-spreading,
deciduous tree reaches a height of 40 to 60 feet and
eventually takes on a flat-topped, somewhat irregular
silhouette. It is often used as a patio, shade, street, or
specimen tree. The small, fragrant, yellow flowers
appear in very showy, dense, terminal panicles in early
summer, and are followed in late summer or fall by
large clusters of the two-inch-long "Chinese lanterns".
These papery husks are held above the foliage and
retain their pink color after drying and are very
popular for use in everlasting flower arrangements.
The bark on Chinese Flame-Tree is smooth and light
brown when young, becoming ridged and furrowed as
the tree matures. Easily distinquished from
Koelreuteria paniculata since Koelreuteria bipinnata
has more upright branches and has twice compound
leaves, whereas Koelreuteria paniculata has single
pinnate compound leaves.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Koelreuteria bipinnata
Pronunciation: kole-roo-TEER-ee-uh
bye-pih-NAY-tuh
Common name(s): Chinese Flame-Tree,
Bougainvillea Goldenraintree
Family: Sapindaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-336, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Koelreuteria bipinnata -- Chinese Flame-Tree Page 2
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
in the highway; reclamation plant; shade tree; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound
Leaflet margin: incised; serrate
Leaflet shape: oblong; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: pink
Koelreuteria bipinnata -- Chinese Flame-Tree Page 3
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Flame-Tree.
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trees need to be trained when young to develop a
strong branch structure. On weak-wooded trees such
as Chinese Flame-Tree, spacing main branches apart
along a central trunk is crucial to developing a durable
tree. As soon as you see them, remove any double or
multiple trunks which develop, especially if they have
embedded or pinched bark in the branch crotch. Be
sure to locate the first major branch high enough off
the ground so that drooping leaves and branches will
not get in the way of traffic below. Train major
branches so they grow up and out, spreading from the
trunk to create the clearance needed for street tree or
parking lot planting.
The tree definitely has a place in many landscapes.
Planted in a full sun location, Chinese Flame-Tree
makes a moderately dense shade tree, but there is
considerable variation among individuals of the
species. Properly pruned and trained trees can be
planted as street or parking lot trees, but do not
commit large areas to Chinese Flame-Tree due to the
possibility of them breaking up as they reach about 30
years old. They will be the source of many
compliments when they are in flower and fruit.
This is a tough tree which should be grown in full
sun on any well-drained soil, in sand or heavy clay,
and should receive moderate watering. The tree
becomes leggy and thin in partial shade. When wellestablished, it tolerates wind, air pollution, salt, heat,
and drought.
Koelreuteria bipinnata -- Chinese Flame-Tree Page 4
Propagation is by seed, which will germinate
within six to eight days.
Some nurseries are mistakenly growing
Koelreuteria elegans or Koelreuteria formosana which
is only cold hardy to USDA hardiness zone 9 instead
of Koelreuteria bipinnata which is cold hardy to
USDA hardiness zone 7b. This problem has given
Chinese Flame-Tree a bad name in some areas of the
mid-south. Be sure to get northern seed source for
propagation to ensure cold hardiness in the northern
part of its range.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Root
rot on old trees. A canker causes dead and sunken
areas on the bark. Coral pink fruiting bodies develop
on the diseased bark. Prune out infected branches and
fertilize to maintain tree health.
Verticillium wilt attacks Koelreuteria. The disease
causes wilting and death of leaves on infected
branches. Eventually the entire tree may be killed.
Fertilize to stimulate growth. There are no chemical
controls.