Fact Sheet ST-342
November 1993
Lagerstroemia indica
Figure 1. Young Crape-Myrtle.
Crape-Myrtle1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A long period of striking summer flower color,
attractive fall foliage, and good drought-tolerance all
combine to make Crape-Myrtle a favorite small tree
for either formal or informal landscapes (Fig. 1). It is
highly recommended for planting in urban and
suburban areas.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Lagerstroemia indica
Pronunciation: lay-ger-STREE-mee-uh IN-dih-kuh
Common name(s): Crape-Myrtle
Family: Lythraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; trainable as a
standard; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-342, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Lagerstroemia indica -- Crape-Myrtle Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender; pink; purple; red; white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Lagerstroemia indica -- Crape-Myrtle Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Crape-Myrtle.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Available in all shades of white, pink, red, or
lavender, the 6- to 12-inch-long clustered blooms
appear on the tips of branches during late spring and
summer in USDA hardiness zones 9 and 10, and
summer in other areas. The individual flowers are
ruffled and crinkly as to appear made of crepe paper.
The smooth, peeling bark and multi-branched, open
habit of Crape-Myrtle make it ideal for specimen
planting where its bright red to orange-colored fall
leaves add further interest. Most forms of the tree are
upright, upright-spreading, or vase-shaped, spreading
out as they ascend. Most tree types grow to 20 to 25
feet tall although there are more dwarf types available.
The upright, vase-shaped crown makes the tallgrowing selections well-suited for street tree planting.
Pruning should be done in late winter or early in
the spring before growth begins because it is easier to
see which branches to prune. New growth can be
pinched during the growing season to increase
branchiness and flower number. Pruning methods vary
from topping to cutting Crape-Myrtle nearly to the
ground each spring to the removal of dead wood and
old flower stalks only. Topping creates several long,
thin branches from each cut which droop down under
the weight of the flowers. This practice disfigures the
nice trunk and branch structure. Lower branches are
often thinned to show off the trunk form and color.
You can remove the spent flower heads to encourage a
second flush of flowers and to prevent formation of
the brown fruits. Since cultivars are now available in
a wide range of growth heights, severe pruning should
not be necessary to control size. Severe pruning or
topping can stimulate basal sprouting which can
become a constant nuisance, requiring regular removal.
Some trees sprout from the base of the trunk and roots
even without severe heading. This can be a
maintenance nuisance.
Crape-Myrtle grows best in full sun with rich,
moist soil but will tolerate less hospitable positions in
the landscape just as well, once it becomes established.
It grows well in limited soil spaces in urban areas such
as along boulevards, in parking lots, and in small
pavement cutouts if provided with some irrigation until
well established. They tolerate clay and alkaline soil
well. However, the flowers of some selections may
stain car paint. Insect pests are few but Crape-Myrtle
is susceptible to powdery mildew damage, especially
when planted in some shade or when the leaves are
kept moist. There are new cultivars (many developed
by the USDA) available which are resistant to
powdery mildew and aphids.
Many cultivars of Crape-Myrtle are available:
hybrid ‘Acoma’, 14 to 16 feet tall, white flowers,
purple-red fall foliage, mildew resistant; hybrid
‘Biloxi’, 25 feet tall, pale pink blooms, orange-red fall
foliage, hardy and mildew resistant; ‘Cherokee’, 10 to
12 feet, bright red flowers; ‘Powhatan’, 14 to 20 feet,
clear yellow fall foliage, medium purple flowers. The
hybrid cultivars ‘Natchez’, 30 feet tall, pure white
flowers, resistant to aphids, one of the best CrapeMyrtles; ‘Muskogee’, 24 feet tall, light lavender
flowers, and ‘Tuscarora’, 16 feet tall, dark coral pink
blooms, are hybrids between Lagerstroemia indica and
Lagerstroemia fauriei and have greater resistance to
Lagerstroemia indica -- Crape-Myrtle Page 4
mildew. The cultivar ‘Crape-Myrtlettes’ have the
same color range as the species but only grow to three
to four feet high. The National Arboretum releases are
generally superior because they have been selected for
their disease resistance. These releases may prove
more resistant to powdery mildew in the Deep South,
although further testing needs to be done to confirm
this.
Propagation is by cuttings or seed.
Pests
Aphids often infest the new growth causing an
unsightly but harmless sooty mold to grow on the
foliage. Heavy aphid infestations cause a heavy black
sooty mold which detracts from the tree’s appearance.
Diseases
Powdery mildew can severely affect Crape-Myrtle.
Select resistant cultivars and hybrids to avoid this
disease. Leaf spots are only a minor concern and do
not require treatment.