Fact Sheet ST-341
November 1993
Lagerstroemia fauriei
Figure 1. Middle-aged Japanese Crape-Myrtle.
Japanese Crape-Myrtle1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Crape-Myrtle is very similar to the more
common Crape-Myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica) except
it has smaller, white blossoms and larger leaves which
show no appreciable fall color change (Fig. 1). It is
also larger in size than the common Crape-Myrtle.
Japanese Crape-Myrtle is a slow-growing, deciduous
tree which reaches 35 to 50 feet in height and has
leathery, four-inch-long leaves. The flaking, peeling,
red and brown bark (on trees trained as single or
multi-trunked) is especially attractive in the winter
garden, when the leaves have fallen. With lower
branches removed, as is often the case with CrapeMyrtle, bark is also very showy during the entire year.
The upright, vase-shaped crown makes Japanese
Crape-Myrtle well-suited for street tree planting.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Lagerstroemia fauriei
Pronunciation: lay-ger-STREE-mee-uh FAR-ee-eye
Common name(s): Japanese Crape-Myrtle
Family: Lythraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; shade tree; specimen; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 50 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette;
symmetrical canopy with a regular (or smooth) outline,
and individuals have more or less identical crown
forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-341, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Lagerstroemia fauriei -- Japanese Crape-Myrtle Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to
grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Lagerstroemia fauriei -- Japanese Crape-Myrtle Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Crape-Myrtle.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Pruning should be done in late winter or early in
the spring before growth begins because it is easier to
see which branches require pruning. New growth can
be pinched during the growing season, when the tree is
very small, to increase branchiness and flower number
but this is not needed to develop good form. The tree
flowers very nicely without pruning. Lower branches
are often thinned to show off the trunk form and color.
You can remove the spent flower heads to encourage a
second flush of flowers and to prevent formation of
the brown fruits.
Japanese Crape-Myrtle would make a wonderful
street tree for residential or commercial landscapes.
Planted on 20-foot-centers, it would form a canopy
over the sidewalk but the crown does not spread
enough to canopy the street. Choose single-trunked
trees for street planting, or well-formed, multi-trunked
specimens with no embedded bark. The outstanding
bark character makes it one of the best specimen trees
for the South. This is likely to become a very popular
tree.
Japanese Crape-Myrtle grows best in full sun with
rich, moist soil but will tolerate less hospitable
positions in the landscape just as well, once it becomes
established. It will probably grow well in limited soil
spaces in urban areas such as along boulevards and in
parking lots.
Propagation is by cuttings or seed.
The cultivar ‘Fantasy’ will become more available,
50 feet tall, white flowers, extremely showy flower
display even on old trees, three-foot diameter trunk 35
years after planting, resistant to powdery mildew.
Pests
No pests are of major concern. Aphids probably
infest the new growth to a certain extent causing a
harmless but unsightly sooty mold to grow on the
foliage.
Diseases
Although powdery mildew can severely affect
most other Crape-Myrtles, Japanese Crape-Myrtle is
very resistant.