Fact Sheet ST-349
November 1993
Lagerstroemia speciosa
Figure 1. Mature Queens Crape-Myrtle.
Queens Crape-Myrtle1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This is one of only a few deciduous trees which
grow in tropical and subtropical areas of the country
(Fig. 1). A profusion of large, three-inch wide, bright
pink to lavender blooms appear in dense, foot-long,
terminal panicles from June to July, making Queen’s
Crape-Myrtle a spectacular specimen or street tree.
This large, upright rounded, deciduous tree is clothed
with 12-inch-long, dark green, oblong, leathery leaves
which turn attractively red before falling in winter.
Queen’s Crape-Myrtle can reach 40 to 60 feet in
height and a spread of 30 to 40 feet. The attractive
bark is smooth, mottled and peeling. In India, the
wood is used for railroad ties and construction. The
bark is thin and easily injured.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Lagerstroemia speciosa
Pronunciation: lay-ger-STREE-mee-uh
spee-see-OH-suh
Common name(s): Queens Crape-Myrtle
Family: Lythraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade tree;
narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; upright; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-349, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Lagerstroemia speciosa -- Queens Crape-Myrtle Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: semievergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender; pink
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Lagerstroemia speciosa -- Queens Crape-Myrtle Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Queens Crape-Myrtle.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Queen’s Crape-Myrtle will grow in full sun on a
wide range of well-drained soils but is not salttolerant. Where there are no overhead restrictions, this
makes a nice large street tree due to the uprightspreading habit of growth. This reduces the regular
pruning needed to remove lower drooping branches on
some other trees. However, when the trees are young,
some lower branches will need to be removed for
street tree planting to create clearance for passage of
pedestrians and vehicles. The tree should tolerate
storms well having hard wood with flexible branches,
as long as they are well spaced along the trunk and not
clumped together growing from one point on the trunk.
Plants should be watered faithfully and protected from
frost. Not a tree to plant and forget, Queen’s CrapeMyrtle appreciates regular fertilization or leaves
become chlorotic. It will tolerate alkaline soil.
Propagation is by cuttings, division of root
suckers, or by seed which germinate readily. Plants
will flower the second year from seed. There are other
species of tropical Lagerstroemia, some available in
selected nurseries.
Pests
Aphids and scale, followed by sooty mold.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.