Fact Sheet ST-351
November 1993
Leucaena retusa
Figure 1. Middle-aged Goldenball Leadtree.
Goldenball Leadtree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Goldenball Leadtree is a native North American
evergreen tree which reaches 25 feet in height and has
blue/green to bright green foliage (Fig. 1). The
showy, yellow to white, rounded blooms appear from
April to October and are especially prominent after a
heavy rain. The attractive fruits which follow ripen in
late summer.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Leucaena retusa
Pronunciation: loo-KAY-nuh ree-TOO-suh
Common name(s): Goldenball Leadtree, Littleleaf
Leucaena, Littleleaf Leadtree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: upright; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: bipinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-351, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Leucaena retusa -- Goldenball Leadtree Page 2
Fruit
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: unknown
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The crown can develop a one-sided or
asymmetrical habit when it is young, so pruning and
training may be needed to form a more uniformly
shaped crown. The drooping habit of the branches
makes it difficult to maintain near a street, but it
would make a nice accent tree for the shrub border or
backyard garden. The tree tends to seed itself into the
surrounding landscape and spreads rapidly. Some
consider it a weed, and the wood is brittle.
Leucaena retusa -- Goldenball Leadtree Page 3
Goldenball Leadtree should be grown in full sun
on well-drained soil and will tolerate alkaline
conditions very well. Care must be taken in the
placement of this tree in the landscape since the wood
is susceptible to breakage in wind- and ice-storms.
Plant it in a spot protected from the wind.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.