Fact Sheet ST-304
November 1993
Ilex opaca
Figure 1. Middle-aged American Holly.
American Holly1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A popular landscape plant since the beginning of
American history, this broad-leafed evergreen has
served a variety of uses through the years (Fig. 1).
The American Indians used preserved Holly berries as
decorative buttons and were much sought after by
other tribes who bartered for them. The wood has
been used for making canes, scroll work and furniture,
and has even been substituted for ebony in inlay work
when stained black.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ilex opaca
Pronunciation: EYE-lecks oh-PAY-kuh
Common name(s): American Holly
Family: Aquifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200
square feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-304, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ilex opaca -- American Holly Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; pectinate; spiny
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green; white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.61
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Ilex opaca -- American Holly Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of American Holly.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
American Holly is a beautifully shaped tree, with
a symmetrical, dense, wide pyramidal form. The
spiny, dull green leaves are accented with clusters of
red berries which persist throughout the fall and
winter. Male and female flowers appear on separate
trees and trees of both sexes must be located in the
same neighborhood to ensure production of berries on
the female plants. American Holly is ideal for use as
a street or courtyard tree (with lower branches
removed), framing tree, specimen, barrier planting or
screen. Roots are shallow and finely branched, and
rarely invasive due to their great number and relatively
small diameter. This native tree is ideal for
naturalizing on moist, slightly acid soils, and the fruit
is very attractive to wildlife, serving as an excellent
food source. A 35-foot-tall tree can be 20 feet wide in
40 years.
Growing well in full sun to partial shade,
American Holly should be located on fertile, welldrained but moist, slightly acid soils below 6.5 pH.
Berry production is highest in full sun on female trees.
American Holly foliage thins during drought but insect
and disease infestations are usually minimal.
Hundreds of cultivars of American Holly have
been developed and hybridized over the years,
providing variety of form, leaf characteristics, and fruit
color. The following is a list of some available
cultivars and hybrids: ‘Carolina #2’ has dark green
leaves and abundant fruit; ‘George E. Hart’ has a
narrow conical growth habit with small dark green
leaves; ‘Hume No. 2’ has compact, dark green foliage,
and heavy fruit; ‘Croonenburg’ has dark green, slightly
glossy foliage and abundant fruit; ‘Howard’ has dense,
glossy green leaves with few spines, large fruit, and a
more compact form; ‘Greenleaf’ is softer in form than
‘Croonenburg’, fast-growing, and responds well to
shearing; ‘Jersey Knight’, a male cultivar, is very
hardy and has excellent foliage; ‘Jersey Princess’, a
female cultivar, has excellent form and shining dark
green leaves; ‘Rotunda’ has an upright growth habit,
smooth, entire, glossy green leaves, and is profusely
fruiting; ‘Ft. McCoy’, ‘Dupre’, ‘Lake City’,
‘Savannah’, and ‘Taber’ all have quite spiny leaves.
‘Savannah’ also has wavy curved foliage and dark,
heavy fruit; ‘East Palatka’, a female cultivar, is
actually Ilex x attenuata, a cross of Ilex cassine x Ilex
opaca, and has only a small spine at the leaf tip.
Those with yellow berries include: ‘Xanthocarpa’,
‘Canary’, and ‘Morgan Gold’.
Those cultivars particularly adapted for the south
include: ‘Amy’ - female, abundant fruit; ‘Bountiful’ -
cone-shaped, compact, dark red fruit annually;
‘Calloway’ - yellow fruit; ‘Miss Helen’ - dark red,
abundant fruit; ‘Slim Jim’ - open, slender Holly with
narrow leaves; ‘Steward’s Cream Crown’ - creamy,
marginal venation; ‘Yellow Jacket’ - cadmium orange
fruit.
Propagation is by cuttings or grafting.
Pests
Holly leaf miner larvae mines out the leaf middle
leaving yellow or brown trails.
Scales of various types may infest Holly.
Ilex opaca -- American Holly Page 4
Spider mites cause discoloration and speckling of
Holly foliage.
Diseases
Tar spot may occasionally cause small yellow
spots on the leaves in early summer. Eventually the
spots turn reddish brown with narrow yellow borders.
Leaves may not drop prematurely but the infected
areas drop out leaving holes in the leaves. Gather up
and destroy badly infected leaves.
Many different fungi cause leaf spots on Holly.
Reduce the injury caused by leaf spots by keeping
trees healthy. Dispose of diseased leaves.
Cankers caused by several different fungi lead to
sunken areas on stems and plant dieback. Keep trees
healthy and prune out infected branches.
Spine spot is small gray or yellow spots with
purple margins and is caused by spines of one leaf
puncturing an adjacent leaf.
Chlorosis symptoms are light green or yellowish
leaves with darker green veins. This problem is often
due to a high pH leading to iron deficiency. Use
acidifying fertilizers and sulfur to bring down the pH.
Sprays of iron chelate will green up plants.
In northern climates, Hollies sometimes scorch
during the late winter due to rapid and wide
temperature fluctuations. Shade plants during the
winter to prevent the problem.
Purple blotches on the leaves are caused by some
environmental factor such as nutrient deficiencies,
drought, and winter injury.
Black root rot can be damaging.