Fact Sheet ST-352
November 1993
Ligustrum japonicum
Figure 1. Mature Japanese Privet.
Japanese Privet1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Although often used as a shrub or hedge, Japanese
Privet works well when allowed to grow into a small
tree, its curved multiple trunks and dark green canopy
creating an interesting architectural focus, 8 to 12 feet
tall and often considerably wider, for the landscape
(Fig. 1). Old specimens can grow to 25 feet across.
The glossy evergreen leaves are abundantly produced
on the upright, spreading branches. The small, white,
malodorous flowers appear in terminal panicles during
spring in the south and in the summer in northern
climes. The blooms are followed by abundant blueblack berries which persist most of the year. The
berries are popular with birds and the dispersed seeds
occasionally germinate where they fall but this is
usually not a nuisance.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ligustrum japonicum
Pronunciation: lih-GUS-trum juh-PAWN-ih-kum
Common name(s): Japanese Privet, Wax-Leaf Privet
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; screen; trainable as a standard; small parking
lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree
pit); residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 8 to 12 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-352, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ligustrum japonicum -- Japanese Privet Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering;
summer flowering; unpleasant fragrance
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; blue; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem; persistent
on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Ligustrum japonicum -- Japanese Privet Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Privet.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although tolerant of tight clipping, Japanese Privet
is quite attractive when allowed to retain its natural
multi-stemmed form, making it ideal for use in
shrubbery borders and other informal settings. It
makes a nice specimen in any landscape where a small
dark tree is needed. Planted close together on about
10 to 15-foot centers, ligustrum will form a canopy
over a pedestrian walkway but will not grow tall or
wide enough for canopy closure over a street or
parking lot. The tree looks best in a landscape setting
with a low groundcover planted around its base.
Japanese Privet grows in full sun or partial shade
and is tolerant of a wide range of soil types, including
calcarious clay as long as water is not allowed to stand
in the root zone. Plants grow quickly while young but
slow with age. Although it can withstand drought,
Japanese Privet is not especially salt-tolerant and will
require protection from direct salt spray. If you decide
to use this plant as a clipped hedge, be sure that the
top is kept narrower than the bottom to provide light
to the lower branches. This will help ensure the plant
will remain full to the ground.
Many cultivars are available and plants grafted
onto L. quihoui for protection against nematodes are
preferred, when available. ‘Silver Star’ has deep green
leaves mottled with grey and edged in creamy white;
‘Texanum’ is very similar to the species but is lowergrowing and has denser growth; ‘Fraseri’ has yellow to
yellow-green new growth; ‘Jack Frost’ has glossy
green leaves with a thin edge of creamy white; ‘Lake
Tresca’ has small leaves and the lower branches droop
to form a mound; ‘Lusterleaf’ has large, thick leaves;
‘Suwanee River’ has compact erect branches; and
‘Variegatum’ has leaves variegated and edged with
white. Ligustrum x vicaryi has golden variegated
leaves, with bright yellow new growth.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
None usually serious, although thrips and mites
can occasionally discolor foliage. Soil nematodes can
cause serious plant decline and they can be prevalent,
particularly in sandy soil.