Fact Sheet ST-357
November 1993
Liquidambar formosana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Formosa Sweetgum.
Formosa Sweetgum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Formosa Sweetgum has a wide, pyramidal shape
when young but eventually grows to a rounded or
irregular form, reaching 40 to 60 feet in height with a
35 to 45-foot spread (Fig. 1). Young specimens may
vary in form and be somewhat irregular. It has a more
rounded crown than native Sweetgum. The large,
three-lobed leaves, purplish-red when young, are dark
green through the growing season and in fall turn a
beautiful yellow-red color in the south or red in the
north. Branches are covered with characteristic corky
projections. Formosa Sweetgum makes a nice park,
campus or residential shade tree for large properties.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Liquidambar formosana
Pronunciation: lick-wid-AM-bar for-moe-SAY-nuh
Common name(s): Formosa Sweetgum, Chinese
Sweetgum
Family: Hamamelidaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); shade
tree; residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 45 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: star-shaped
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-357, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Liquidambar formosana -- Formosa Sweetgum Page 2
Leaf venation: palmate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Liquidambar formosana -- Formosa Sweetgum Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Formosa Sweetgum.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Be careful when locating Formosa Sweetgum as a
street tree since its large, aggressive roots may
eventually lift curbs and sidewalks. Plant trees 8 to 10
feet or more away. The fruit may be a litter nuisance
to some in the fall, but this is usually only noticeable
on hard surfaces, such as roads, patios, and sidewalks.
Fruit is softer than Liquidambar styraciflua and
probably is less of a nuisance.
Although it grows at a moderate pace, Formosa
Sweetgum requires continually-moist soils. It is
recommended only for acidic soils since chlorosis
develops on soils with a pH over 7.5. It grows very
well in clay soils which hold moisture, and tolerates
wet soil. Formosa Sweetgum is difficult to transplant
in the fall from the field due to a coarse, deep root
system on well-drained soil and should be planted
from containers or transplanted when young. Grows
well as a street tree in confined soil spaces due to its
ability to tolerate poorly aerated soil, but only when
supplied with adequate moisture. This tree should be
tested further for adaptability to urban sites.
Liquidambar spp. grow very well for several years
after transplanting in Texas and in other areas with a
high pH subsoil but chlorosis often develops as some
roots establish themselves in the alkaline subsoil. The
tree is very susceptible to Endothia canker infection
and, in some areas of the country, has devastated the
tree.
The cultivar ‘Afterglow’ has lavender purple new
growth and rose-red fall color. Liquidambar
styraciflua ‘Rotundiloba’ does not set fruit and could
be a superior tree.
Propagation is by seeds which may not germinate
until the second year.
Pests
Bagworm makes sacks by webbing together pieces
of leaves. The insects live in the sacks while they
feed. Small numbers of insects may be picked off by
hand.
Fall webworm webs over portions of large
branches or may completely cover small branches.
The insects feed on leaves inside the nest. If practical,
nests can be pruned out while small and when the
insects are inside. A few nests in large trees are not
serious. Trees do not die from infestations of fall
webworms.
Leaf miner causes brown blotches on leaves. If
injury is caused by leaf miner the browned upper and
lower leaf surfaces will be completely separate when
the leaf is torn in two.
Cottony-cushion scale, Sweetgum scale, and
walnut scale can infest the branches.
Tent caterpillars make nests to live in but leave
the nests to feed. Prune out nests at the tips of small
branches. Do not burn the nest while it is still in the
tree since this will injure the tree and could start an
uncontrolled fire.
Diseases
Formosa Sweetgum may be attacked by canker
diseases. These diseases cause sunken areas on the
trunk and some cause profuse "bleeding". Infected
bark and sapwood will be brown and dead. There is
no chemical control for canker diseases. Severely
infected trees will die. Prune cankers out of lightly
infected trees. Maintain tree health by watering and
fertilizing.
Endothia gyrosa has devastated Formosa
Sweetgum in some areas of USDA hardiness zone 8.
Liquidambar formosana -- Formosa Sweetgum Page 4
Leaf spots of various types may attack Formosa
Sweetgum but are not serious. Rake up infected
leaves.