Fact Sheet ST-358
November 1993
Liquidambar styraciflua
Figure 1. Young Sweetgum.
Sweetgum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sweetgum grows in a narrow pyramid to a height
of 75 feet and may spread to 50 feet (Fig. 1). The
beautifully glossy, star-shaped leaves turn bright red,
purple, yellow or orange in the fall (USDA hardiness
zones 6 and 7) and early winter (USDA hardiness
zones 8 and 9). On some trees, particularly in the
northern part of its range, branches are covered with
characteristic corky projections. The trunk is normally
straight and does not divide into double or multiple
leaders and side branches are small in diameter on
young trees, creating a pyramidal form. The bark
becomes deeply ridged at about 25-years-old.
Sweetgum makes a nice conical park, campus or
residential shade tree for large properties when it is
young, developing a more oval or rounded canopy as
it grows older as several branches become dominant
and grow in diameter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Liquidambar styraciflua
Pronunciation: lick-wid-AM-bar
sty-rass-ih-FLOO-uh
Common name(s): Sweetgum
Family: Hamamelidaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); reclamation
plant; shade tree; specimen; residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 75 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-358, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Liquidambar styraciflua -- Sweetgum Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; purple; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Liquidambar styraciflua -- Sweetgum Page 3
Current year twig thickness: medium
Figure 3. Foliage of Sweetgum.
Wood specific gravity: 0.52
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Be careful when locating Sweetgum as a street
tree since its large, aggressive roots may lift curbs and
sidewalks. Plant trees 8 to 10 feet or more from
curbs. Some communities have large numbers of
Sweetgum planted as street trees. Much of the root
system is shallow (particularly in its native, moist
habitat), but there are deep vertical roots directly
beneath the trunk in well-drained and in some other
soils. The fruit may be a litter nuisance to some in the
fall, but this is usually only noticeable on hard
surfaces, such as roads, patios, and sidewalks, where
people could slip and fall on the fruit. The cultivar
‘Rotundiloba’ is fruitless. The tree should be planted
only in soil with a pH of 7 or less. The seeds provide
food for wildlife and will often readily germinate in
shrub and groundcover beds, requiring their removal to
maintain a neat landscape appearance. Tree thickets
form in this manner, creating dense monocultures of
Sweetgum.
Although it grows at a moderate pace, Sweetgum
is rarely attacked by pests, and tolerates wet soils, but
chlorosis is often seen in alkaline soils. Trees grow
well in deep soil, poorly in shallow, droughty soil. It
is difficult to transplant and should be planted from
containers or transplanted in the spring when young
since it develops deep roots on well-drained soil. It is
native to bottomlands and moist soils and tolerates
only some (if any) drought. Existing trees often dieback near the top of the crown, apparently due to
extreme sensitivity to construction injury to the root
system, or drought injury. The tree leafs out early in
the spring and is sometimes damage by frost.
Cultivars have been selected for their fall color,
leaf shape, or growth habit: ‘Burgundy’ - beautiful,
glossy green leaves, burgundy red fall color, holds
leaves late into fall, narrow pyramid, less cold hardy,
more adapted to the southern part of its range;
‘Festival’ - narrow upright growth habit, peach-colored
fall foliage, less cold hardy, more adapted to the
southern part of the range; ‘Moraine’ is reputed to be
the most cold hardy; ‘Palo Alto’ - pyramidal,
symmetrical growth, bright orange fall color;
‘Rotundiloba’ - round leaf tips, no fruit production,
narrow pyramidal form. Liquidambar formosana has a
broader spreading crown.
Liquidambar styraciflua -- Sweetgum Page 4
Pests
Bagworm makes sacks by webbing together pieces
of leaves. The insects live in the sacks while they
feed. Small numbers of insects may be picked off by
hand.
Fall webworm webs over portions of large
branches or may completely cover small branches.
The insects feed on leaves inside the nest. If practical,
nests can be pruned out while small and when the
insects are inside. A few nests in large trees are not
serious.
Leaf miner causes brown blotches on leaves. If
injury is caused by leaf miner the browned upper and
lower leaf surfaces will be completely separate when
the leaf is torn in two.
Cottony-cushion scale, Sweetgum scale, and
walnut scale can infest the branches. Use horticultural
oil in the spring to help provide control.
Tent caterpillars make nests to live in but leave
the nests to feed. Prune out nests at the tips of small
branches. Do not burn the nest while it is still in the
tree because you will injure the tree.
Diseases
Sweetgum may be attacked by canker diseases.
These diseases cause sunken areas on the trunk and
some cause profuse "bleeding". Infected bark and
sapwood will be brown and dead. There is no
chemical control for canker diseases. Severely
infected trees will die. Prune cankers out of lightly
infected trees. Maintain tree health by watering and
fertilizing.
Leaf spots of various types may attack Sweetgum,
causing premature defoliation, but are not serious.
Rake up and destroy infected leaves to help control if
there are no adjacent Sweetgum to add inoculum.
Leader dieback on established trees in the southern
U.S. may be due to lack of moisture and/or
construction injury.