Fact Sheet ST-363
November 1993
Liriodendron tulipifera
Figure 1. Middle-aged Tuliptree.
Tuliptree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Tuliptree grows 80 to 100 feet tall and maintains a
fairly narrow oval crown, even as it grows older (Fig.
1). Trunks become massive in old age, becoming
deeply furrowed with thick bark. The tree maintains a
straight trunk and generally does not form double or
multiple leaders. Older trees have several largediameter major limbs in the top half of the crown.
Tuliptree has a moderate to rapid (on good sites)
growth rate at first but slows down with age. The soft
wood reportedly is subject to storm damage but the
trees held up remarkably well in the south during
hurricane ‘Hugo’. It is probably stronger than given
credit for. The largest trees in the east are in the
Joyce Kilmer Forest in NC, some reaching more than
150 feet with seven-foot diameter trunks. The fall
color is gold to yellow being more pronounced in the
northern part of its range. The scented, tulip-like,
greenish-yellow flowers appear in mid-spring but are
not as ornamental as those of other flowering trees
because they are far from view.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Liriodendron tulipifera
Pronunciation: leer-ee-oh-DEN-drawn
too-lih-PIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Tuliptree, Tulip-Poplar,
Yellow-Poplar
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: shade tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-363, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Liriodendron tulipifera -- Tuliptree Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 80 to 100 feet
Spread: 30 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; entire
Leaf shape: orbiculate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Liriodendron tulipifera -- Tuliptree Page 3
Wood specific gravity: 0.42
Figure 3. Foliage of Tuliptree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although a rather large tree, Tulip-Poplar could be
used along residential streets with very large lots and
plenty of soil for root growth if set back 10 or 15 feet.
Not generally planted in large numbers and probably
best for a specimen or for lining commercial entrances
with lots of soil space. Trees can be planted from
containers at any time in the south but transplanting
from a field nursery should be done in spring,
followed by faithful watering. Plants prefer welldrained, acid soil. Drought conditions in summer can
cause premature defoliation of interior leaves which
turn bright yellow and fall to the ground, especially on
newly-transplanted trees. The tree may be short-lived
in parts of USDA hardiness zone 9, although there are
a number of young specimens about two feet in
diameter in the southern part of USDA hardiness zone
8b. It is usually recommended only for moist sites in
many parts of Texas, including Dallas, but has grown
in an open area with plenty of soil space for root
expansion near Auburn and Charlotte without
irrigation where the trees are vigorous and look nice.
There are several cultivars: ‘Aureo-maculatum’ --
leaves with yellow blotches, ‘Aureo-marginatum’ --
leaves edged with yellow, ‘Fastigiatum’ -- columnar
growth, ‘Pyramidale’ -- narrow growth habit. None
are commonly available.
Pests
Aphids, particularly Tuliptree aphid, can build up
to large numbers, leaving heavy deposits of honeydew
on lower leaves, cars, and other hard surfaces below.
A black, sooty mold may grow on the honeydew.
Although this does little permanent damage to the tree,
the honeydew and sooty mold can be annoying.
Tuliptree scales are brown, oval and may be first
seen on lower branches. Scales deposit honeydew
which supports the growth of sooty mold. Use
horticultural oil sprays in spring before plant growth
begins.
Tuliptree is considered resistant to gypsy moth.
Diseases
Tuliptree is attacked by several cankers. Infected,
girdled branches dieback from the tip to the point of
infection. Keep trees healthy and prune out infected
branches.
Leaf spots are usually not serious enough to
warrant chemical controls. Once leaves are heavily
infected the opportunity for chemical control is lost.
Rake up and dispose of infected leaves. Leaves often
fall during summer and litter the ground with yellow,
spotted leaves.
Powdery mildew causes a white coating on the
leaves and is not usually harmful.
Liriodendron tulipifera -- Tuliptree Page 4
Sooty mold makes a black coating on leaves and
stems. The fungus grows on the honeydew left by
insects, particularly aphids. Control sooty mold by
preventing the build up of insects populations.
Verticillium wilt causes wilting and death of
leaves on infected branches. Severe infections kill
trees. Keep trees vigorous with a regular maintenance
program, including fertilizer.
During hot, dry weather interior leaves turn yellow
and fall off. This condition is due to the weather and
is not a disease. The problem is most common on
newly transplanted trees, but also develops frequently
on established trees. Yellowing may be preceded by
small, angular, brown spots on the leaves.