Fact Sheet ST-366
November 1993
Lysiloma bahamensis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Wild-Tamarind.
Wild-Tamarind1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Cuban Tamarind is native to South Florida and
grows moderately fast, up to 40 to 60 feet tall and 45
feet wide, its slender, short trunk topped with long,
somewhat arching branches forming an umbrella-like
silhouette (Fig. 1). The pale green, pinnately
compound, fern-like leaves are a showy red when
young and make a striking contrast, the new and older
growth appearing together. Developing into a more
open tree with age, Cuban Tamarind makes an ideal
shade, park, or seaside planting.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Lysiloma bahamensis
Pronunciation: lye-sih-LOE-muh bah-hah-MEN-sis
Common name(s): Wild-Tamarind, Bahama
Lysiloma
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; shade tree; narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 30 to 45 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: vase shape; weeping
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-366, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: November 1993.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Lysiloma bahamensis -- Wild-Tamarind Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; even pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Lysiloma bahamensis -- Wild-Tamarind Page 3
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Figure 3. Foliage of Wild-Tamarind.
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Cities have planted Cuban and Wild Tamarind
(Lysiloma latisiliqua) along streets with good success.
They are probably well suited for this use.
Codominant stems form very low on the trunk without
proper pruning and training, and branches will droop
toward the ground. Specify trees for planting along
streets and in parking lots that have a clear trunk to
about five feet or more to help avoid this problem. If
large branches are allowed to develop below this point,
the tree could become disfigured as these branches
have to be removed in the future to allow for passage
of vehicles and pedestrians. Locate the first permanent
branch 6 (preferably 10) or more feet from the ground
to allow for clearance. Low branches can be left on
the tree if it will be planted in a yard, park or other
location where vehicle clearance is not a concern.
Major branches often develop embedded or
included bark as they grow at the same rate as the
trunk. They often grow to about the same size as the
trunk. This does not appear to be a problem on small
trees but could encourage branch breakage as the tree
grows older. Try to keep the major branches from
growing larger than about two-thirds the diameter of
the trunk.
The small, white flowers appear in late spring as
fuzzy globes and are followed by four to six-inch-long,
thin, flattened, red/brown seedpods which disperse
their brown seeds in fall.
Cuban Tamarind should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on rich, well-drained soil and is sensitive
to freezing weather. The tree is also highly droughtand salt-tolerant making it ideal for use in seaside
landscapes.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Stem galls.
Diseases
Rust diseases.