Fact Sheet ST-367
October 1994
Maackia amurensis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Amur Maackia.
Amur Maackia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A very hardy and adaptable tree, Amur Maackia is
a slow-growing, deciduous tree which reaches 45 feet
tall in the wild but is most often seen at 20 to 30 feet
in landscapes (Fig. 1). The multi-divided leaflets are
grey/green when young but mature to dark green, and
often drop in fall without significantly changing color.
In summer, dense, erect, 8-inch-long racemes of bloom
appear, each small, off-white flower tinged with very
pale, dark-blue. These blooms are followed by the
appearance of flat, two to three-inch-long pods. Amur
Maackia may be well-suited to use as a street or
container tree (or in other confined soil spaces in
urban areas), where the peeling, orange/brown, shiny
bark is especially noticeable. Usually seen with
numerous small-diameter trunks originating from the
lower trunk. Thirty-five-year-old, single-trunked trees
have a diameter of about one foot.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Maackia amurensis
Pronunciation: MACK-ee-uh am-moor-EN-sis
Common name(s): Amur Maackia
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; shade tree; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 35 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-367, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Maackia amurensis -- Amur Maackia Page 2
Crown density: moderate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: oblong; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2
inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Maackia amurensis -- Amur Maackia Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Amur Maackia.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Lower branches slowly droop toward the
horizontal as the tree grows forming an attractive
outline - almost the perfect small tree form. If grown
near a walk or along the street be sure to prune early
in the life of the tree to locate the lower branches far
enough up on the trunk where the drooping branches
will not interfere with traffic below. This will
eliminate the need to prune older trees which
reportedly close over the pruning wound very slowly.
Most branches grow upright and will form a wonderful
canopy over a sidewalk or narrow road.
Amur Maackia should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil, either acid or slightly alkaline.
Plants should receive not be exposed to excessive
flooding. Amur Maackia has nitrogen fixing bacteria
associated with the root system and should require
little maintenance other than some pruning early in the
life of the tree. It should be grown and planted more
often. It was one of the most drought tolerant trees
during the 1988 drought.
Propagation is by seed or by cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.