Fact Sheet ST-368
October 1994
Maclura pomifera
Figure 1. Mature Osage-Orange.
Osage-Orange1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This deciduous North American native tree rapidly
grows 30 to 40 feet tall with a spread of 20 to 40 feet
and creates a dense canopy, making it useful as a
windbreak (Fig. 1). Young trees can develop an
upright, pyramidal habit. The large, three to six-inchlong by two to three-inch-wide, shiny, dark green
leaves turn bright yellow in fall before dropping,
although this color change is not quite as noticeable on
trees grown in the southeastern United States. The
bark is deeply furrowed and has an orange tinge to it,
and the strong, durable wood is bright orange in color.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Maclura pomifera
Pronunciation: muh-KLOO-ruh poe-MIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Osage-Orange, Bois-D’Arc
Family: Moraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; tree has been successfully
grown in urban areas where air pollution, poor
drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 20 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: lanceolate; oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-368, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Maclura pomifera -- Osage-Orange Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Maclura pomifera -- Osage-Orange Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Osage-Orange.
It is reported that the Osage Indians made their
hunting bows from this beautiful and hard wood, and
it is also used to make furniture. From April to June,
Osage-Orange puts out its inconspicuous green flowers
but these are followed by the very conspicuous fruits.
The fruits are four to five-inch-diameter, roughtextured, heavy green balls which ripen to yellowgreen and fall in October and November. These fruits
are inedible, the juice acid and milky, but squirrels
relish the small seeds buried inside the pulp. When
the fruits drop, they can be very messy and, for this
reason, male, fruitless trees should be selected if you
plant this tree. Osage-Orange is thorny, just like true
citrus trees, and forms thickets if left to grow on its
own. However, there are thornless cultivars available.
Osage-Orange should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil. This tough, native plant can
withstand almost anything once established - heat,
cold, wind, drought, poor soil, ice storms, vandalism -
but appreciates regular watering when young until it is
established.
Thornless, fruitless cultivars include ‘Witchita’,
‘White Shield’, and ‘Park’.
Propagation is by seed, cuttings, and root-cuttings.
Young trees are easily transplanted.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.