Fact Sheet ST-386
October 1994
Magnolia x soulangiana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Saucer Magnolia.
Saucer Magnolia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Saucer Magnolia is a multi-stemmed, spreading
tree, 25 feet tall with a 20 to 30-foot spread and
bright, attractive gray bark (Fig. 1). Growth rate is
moderately fast but slows down considerably as the
tree reaches about 20-years of age. Young trees are
distinctly upright, becoming more oval, then round by
10 years of age. Large, fuzzy, green flower buds are
carried through the winter at the tips of brittle
branches. The blooms open in late winter to early
spring before the leaves, producing large, white
flowers shaded in pink, creating a spectacular flower
display. However, a late frost can often ruin the
flowers in all areas where it is grown. This can be
incredibly disappointing since you wait 51 weeks for
the flowers to appear. In warmer climates, the lateflowering selections avoid frost damage but some are
less showy than the early-flowered forms which
blossom when little else is in flower.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Magnolia x soulangiana
Pronunciation: mag-NO-lee-uh x
soo-lan-jee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Saucer Magnolia
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
near a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-386, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Magnolia x soulangiana -- Saucer Magnolia Page 2
Texture: coarse
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; irregular
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: inconspicuous and not showy;
no significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Magnolia x soulangiana -- Saucer Magnolia Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Saucer Magnolia.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree is best used as a specimen in a sunny
spot where it can develop a symmetrical crown. It can
be pruned up if planted close to a walk or patio to
allow for pedestrian clearance but probably looks its
best when branches are left to droop to the ground.
The light gray bark shows off nicely, particularly
during the winter when the tree is bare.
Saucer Magnolia grows best in a sunny location in
rich, moist but porous soil. It will tolerate poor
drainage for only a short period of time. Growth will
be thin and leggy in a shaded spot but acceptable in
part shade. Saucer Magnolia dislikes dry or alkaline
soil but will otherwise grow very well in the city.
Transplant in the spring, just before growth begins,
and use balled and burlapped or containerized plants.
Older plants do not like to be pruned and large
wounds may not close well. Train plants early in their
life to develop the desired form.
Some Saucer Magnolia cultivars will be hard to
find: ‘Alba’ - flowers almost white; ‘Alexandrina’ -
flowers almost white; ‘Amabalis’ - flowers white;
‘Andre LeRoy’ - flowers dark pink to purplish outside,
cup shaped; ‘Brozzonii’ - flowers white shaded with
purple; ‘Burgundy’ - deep purple flowers, blooms
earlier; ‘Grace McDade’ - flowers white with pink at
the petal bases; ‘Lennei’ - flowers rosy purple outside,
white flushed with purple inside, flowers large, blooms
later; ‘Lilliputian’ - slow grower to 10 to 15 feet tall;
‘Lombardy Rose’ - similar to Lennei except flowers
continue to open for several weeks; ‘Niemetzi’ -
upright growth; ‘Rubra’ - (‘Rustica’, ‘Rustica Rubra’) -
similar to ‘Lennei’; ‘San Jose’ - large flowers nearly
as dark as ‘Lennei’; ‘Speciosa’ - similar to ‘Alba’ but
it is last of the cultivars to bloom, a tall, upright, fastgrowing tree; ‘Spectabilis’ - flowers almost white;
‘Verbanica’ - flowers clear rose pink outside, late
blooming, slow-growing to 10 feet tall.
Pests
Generally it is pest free. Scales of various types
may infest twigs. Magnolia scale is the most common
scale and can be one half-inch-across. Overwintering
scales are usually controlled with horticultural oil
applied in the spring.
Tulip-Poplar weevil (sassafras weevil) feeds as a
leaf miner when young and chews holes in the leaves
as an adult.
Diseases
The tree is generally disease free. Magnolia may
be subject to leaf spots caused by bacteria or a large
number of fungi. Leaf spots rarely require chemical
controls. Rake up and dispose of infected leaves.
Canker diseases will kill branches. Cankers on
branches can be pruned out. Keep trees healthy with
regular fertilization and by watering in dry weather.
Magnolia x soulangiana -- Saucer Magnolia Page 4
Verticillium wilt may cause death of a few
branches or may kill the tree. Prune out dead
branches and fertilize with high nitrogen fertilizer.