Fact Sheet ST-378
October 1994
Magnolia denudata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Yulan Magnolia.
Yulan Magnolia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Also known as Magnolia heptapeta, this broad,
spreading, deciduous tree has a relatively fast growth
rate and eventually reaches 30 to 40 feet in height
with an equal spread (Fig. 1). The crown is open and
forms a rounded outline several years after planting in
full sun. The off-white, saucer-shaped, six-inchdiameter, fragrant blooms appear on the trees before
the emergence of the seven-inch-long, dark green
leaves. The blooms are followed by five-inch-long,
brown fruits which ripen in early fall to reveal the
bright red, inner seeds. Although there is no
appreciable fall color change, the multi-stemmed,
irregular form of Yulan Magnolia makes it quite
striking in the winter garden after the leaves have
fallen.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Magnolia denudata
Pronunciation: mag-NO-lee-uh den-yoo-DAY-tuh
Common name(s): Yulan Magnolia
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-378, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Magnolia denudata -- Yulan Magnolia Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Magnolia denudata -- Yulan Magnolia Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Yulan Magnolia.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This small tree is best used as a patio tree for
shade and accent due to the low branching habit,
attractive foliage and striking gray bark. It would look
very nice lining an entrance walk to a commercial
buiding or in a double or single row set back from an
entrance roadway or long driveway. Grows well in
urban areas but avoid poor, compacted soil. Nice for
an urban garden.
Yulan Magnolia should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on rich, moisture-retentive soil in an area
protected from harsh, dry winds. Plants should not be
exposed to overly wet or dry conditions.
Available cultivars include: ‘Japanese Clone’,
larger flowers; ‘Lacey’, flowers up to eight inches
across. Yulan Magnolia was used as a parent plant
along with Magnolia acuminata to produce the hybrid
‘Elizabeth’ which has a pyramidal shape and clear
yellow, fragrant blooms.
Propagation is by seed sown immediately after
ripening, since they will quickly lose their viability.
Sometimes cuttings of these trees are grafted onto
Magnolia x soulangiana
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
occasionally bothered by Magnolia scale as are many
other Magnolias.