Fact Sheet ST-369
October 1994
Magnolia acuminata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Cucumbertree.
Cucumbertree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
One of the fastest-growing Magnolias,
Cucumbertree is pyramidal when young but becomes
broad, oval or rounded with age, ultimately reaching
60 to 80 feet in height with a spread of 35 to 60 feet
(Fig. 1). Branches on open-grown trees eventually
touch the ground if left unpruned, but when lower
branches are removed the higher branches normally
will not droop to touch the ground. This provides
good clearance beneath the tree for pedestrian traffic.
Older trees have a stately silhouette, particularly in the
winter with branches bare, sporting a number of largediameter branches growing from a dominant central
trunk. The trunk can grow to be five feet thick and
the wood has been used, along with Tuliptree
(Liriodendron tulipifera), for "poorman’s walnut."
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Magnolia acuminata
Pronunciation: mag-NO-lee-uh
ack-yoo-mih-NAY-tuh
Common name(s): Cucumbertree, Cucumber
Magnolia
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 35 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: pyramidal; upright
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-369, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Magnolia acuminata -- Cucumbertree Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: brown; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.48
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Magnolia acuminata -- Cucumbertree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Cucumbertree.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The large, six to 10-inch, yellow/green, deciduous
leaves are lighter and fuzzy underneath and cast very
dense shade below, making Cucumbertree ideal as a
shade or specimen tree. The slightly fragrant, threeinch-wide flowers appear in May or early June but
their greenish-yellow to yellow coloring causes them
to become lost among the foliage. These blooms are
followed by the production of four-inch-long, deep red
fruits which somewhat resemble a cucumber in shape.
The seeds of Cucumbertree are very popular with birds
and other wildlife.
Many Magnolias have a root system which spreads
more than other trees. This is thought to contribute to
the poor growth following transplanting Magnolia
from a field nursery. There is no problem planting
from containers, provided adequate irrigation is given
until established.
This tree is best on large estates and open-soil
areas such as parks and golf courses or along either
side of an entrance road with plenty of soil space for
root expansion. It does not tolerate the compacted,
disturbed soils of urban areas. Be sure young trees
receive adequate irrigation until the root system is
well-established in loose, open soil.
A North American native, Cucumbertree grows in
full sun or partial shade on well-drained soils, and
should be protected from harsh, dry winds. In their
native habitat, trees do best in slightly acidic soil along
stream banks and on cool hillsides. Plants should not
be exposed to prolonged flooding, drought, or too
much pollution, but they will tolerate alkaline and wet
soil quite well. Although trees should be allowed to
grow and develop naturally except for occasional
removal of upright branches, any pruning which might
be necessary should be done only after flowering so
the flower display can be enjoyed.
The cultivar ‘Variegata’ has yellow-variegated
leaves. Cucumbertree was used as a parent plant
along with Magnolia denudata to produce the hybrid
‘Elizabeth’ which has a pyramidal shape and clear
yellow, fragrant blooms.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
occasionally bothered by scale as are many other
Magnolias.