Fact Sheet ST-371
October 1994
Magnolia grandiflora
Figure 1. Middle-aged Southern Magnolia.
Southern Magnolia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large, stately, native North American
evergreen tree with its large, beautiful, saucer-shaped,
fragrant flowers is almost a Southern landscape
tradition (Fig. 1). It has been selected as the state tree
of Mississippi. Capable of growing at a moderate rate
to a height of 80 feet or more with a 30 to 40-foot
spread, Southern Magnolia forms a dense (more open
in the shade), dark green pyramidal shape, the lower
branches often bending to the ground. However, form
and growth rate on seedlings is incredibly variable.
Some are dense and make great screens, others are
very open with large spaces between branches; some
have a narrow, almost columnar form, others are as
wide as they are tall. Select from the many available
cultivars to ensure the desired shape and density. The
trunk on large specimens can grow to more than three
feet in diameter, and frequently grows straight up
through the center of the crown. Branches are
typically numerous and small in diameter. Remove
those few branches which occasionally form weak,
tight crotches.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Magnolia grandiflora
Pronunciation: mag-NO-lee-uh gran-dih-FLOR-uh
Common name(s): Southern Magnolia
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: espalier; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; screen;
shade tree; specimen; residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-371, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Magnolia grandiflora -- Southern Magnolia Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; summer flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Magnolia grandiflora -- Southern Magnolia Page 3
Breakage: resistant
Figure 3. Foliage of Southern Magnolia.
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.50
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The five to 8-inch-long, leathery, oblong, shiny
leaves are shed as new foliage emerges but the debris
is well-hidden by the dense foliage of the lower limbs,
if they are left on the tree. But some people consider
this a litter nuisance when the large, slowlydecomposing leaves drop on the sidewalk, lawn or
patio. The underside of the leaves is covered with a
fine, red-brown fuzz which is more prominent on some
selections than others. In late spring and sporadically
throughout the summer, huge, 8-inch-diameter, waxy,
fragrant, white blossoms open to perfume the entire
garden. Fuzzy brown cones follow these blooms,
ripening in fall and winter to reveal bright red seeds
which are used by a variety of wildlife.
Long-used as a striking garden specimen, Southern
Magnolia can also serve as a dense screen (select one
of the dense cultivars), windbreak or street tree (with
lower limbs removed). The only objection to this tree
as a street tree might be the falling leaves and fruit.
Its ease of growth and carefree nature make Southern
Magnolia ideal for the low-maintenance landscape.
With proper pruning, Southern Magnolia trees can also
be used as an interesting espalier.
If moist, peaty soils are available, Southern
Magnolia will thrive in full sun and hot conditions
once established. If irrigation cannot be provided
periodically, plants located in partial shade for several
years after planting seem to grow better. Very drought
tolerant when grown in areas with plenty of soil for
root expansion. Only moderately drought tolerant in
restricted-soil areas or in areas with poor, dry soil.
Southern Magnolia prefers acid soil but will tolerate a
slightly basic, even wet or clay soil. It is generally too
hot and dry in central and western Texas and
Oklahoma, and the soil pH is often too alkaline for
this tree. The root system is wider spreading than
most other trees, extending from the trunk a distance
equal to about four times the canopy width. This
makes it very difficult to save existing Magnolia trees
on construction sites. Be sure that there are no roots
circling close to the trunk, as Magnolia is prone to
girdling roots. Cut any circling roots prior to planting.
Field-grown trees recover slowly from transplanting
due to the wide-spreading root system in the nursery,
and trees often transplant best in winter and spring, not
in the fall.
The species germinated from seed is quite variable
in growth rate and form with some trees dense and
compact, others loose and open. A number of
cultivars are available: ‘Bracken’s Brown Beauty’ has
an unusually dark brown lower leaf surface and is
considered one of the best selections; ‘Cairo’ has an
early and long flowering period; ‘Charles Dickens’ has
broad, nearly blunt leaves, large flowers and large red
fruit; ‘Edith Bogue’ is the hardiest of the cultivars and
will bloom when only two to three-years-old; ‘Glen St.
Mary’ has a compact form, will bloom when young, is
Magnolia grandiflora -- Southern Magnolia Page 4
slow-growing, and the leaves have a bronze underside;
‘Gloriosa’ has large flowers and leaves; ‘Goliath’ has
flowers up to 12 inches across, a long blooming
period, and a bushy habit of growth; ‘Hasse’ can be
used for a compact, dense hedge or screen;
‘Lanceolata’ has a narrow pyramidal form, narrower
leaves with rusty undersides; ‘Little Gem’ has a dwarf
upright form, probably to 30 feet tall, small leaves and
flowers, is very slow-growing, flowers heavily at an
early age and for a long time during the summer (5-
months), and has bronze leaf-undersides. It will bloom
when only three to four feet tall and is excellent as a
pruned evergreen hedge, for use as a small street tree
or for use as an espalier; ‘Majestic Beauty’ (patented)
has large, dark green leaves, a pyramidal shape, and
profuse flowering; ‘Praecox Fastigiata’ has upright,
narrow growth habit; ‘Samuel Sommer’ has an upright,
rapid growth habit and flowers up to 14 inches across;
‘Victoria’ is very hardy, has small flowers, and rustred leaf-undersides. There are others, but it is often
difficult to see real differences among them.
Two of the most recommended Magnolias are:
Magnolia x ‘Galaxy’ and ‘Spectrum’ from U.S.
National Arboretum; both have excellent trunks and
superior flowers.
Propagation is by cuttings (for the cultivars),
grafting, or seed.
Pests
Scales of various types will infest twigs and
leaves. Magnolia scale is the most common scale and
can be one half-inch-across. Overwintering scales can
be controlled with horticultural oil. Trees appear to
grow fine even with heavy infestations, although they
can be unsightly.
Tulip-poplar weevil (sassafras weevil) feeds as a
leaf miner when young and chews holes in the leaves
as an adult.
Magnolia borer is a problem on young nursery
stock. It girdles the trunk usually just below the soil
surface. Control is difficult but attainable with the
proper material.
Diseases
Magnolia may be subject to leaf spots, blights,
scabs and black mildews caused by a large number of
fungi, or a bacterium but they rarely require chemical
controls. Raking up and disposing infected leaves may
reduce leaf spots next year. Algae can also cause leaf
spots.
Canker diseases will kill branches. Cankers on
branches can be pruned out. Keep trees healthy with
regular fertilization and by watering in dry weather.
Verticillium wilt may cause death of a few
branches or, rarely, may kill the tree. Prune out dead
branches and fertilize.