Fact Sheet ST-379
October 1994
Magnolia kobus
Figure 1. Mature Kobus Magnolia.
Kobus Magnolia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A striking tree in summer or winter (Fig. 1).
Dropping its large, six-inch leaves in fall without any
spectacular display of color, Kobus Magnolia forms an
attractive winter specimen with its rounded silhouette
and multiple trunks originating close to the ground.
Supposedly grows 30 to 40 feet tall but is most often
25 feet or less in an open, sunny landscape site and is
capable of reaching 75 feet in height in its native
forest habitat. In an open site, spread is often greater
than height with 25-foot-tall trees 35 feet wide if given
the room to grow unobstructed. Branches gracefully
touch the ground on older specimens as the tree
spreads, in a manner not unlike open-grown Live
Oaks. Allow plenty of room for proper development.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Magnolia kobus
Pronunciation: mag-NO-lee-uh KOE-bus
Common name(s): Kobus Magnolia, Northern
Japanese Magnolia
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-379, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Magnolia kobus -- Kobus Magnolia Page 2
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; irregular
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: pink; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Magnolia kobus -- Kobus Magnolia Page 3
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Figure 3. Foliage of Kobus Magnolia.
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The lightly-fragrant blooms which appear in spring
before the new leaves unfold are ivory-colored to pale
pink and four inches in diameter. Young trees flower
poorly. The pink fruits which develop split open to
reveal bright red seeds, which sway from slender
threads before dropping to the ground.
Kobus Magnolia should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on any well-drained soil. Probably not
for poorly-drained areas but supposedly tolerant of soil
with an alkaline pH.
The cultivar ‘Wada’s Memory’ has black-green
leaves, large, six-inch blooms and an upright or
columnar growth habit (at least in youth). It will be
available at selected nurseries.
Propagation is easily done by cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
occasionally bothered by scale as are other Magnolias.