Fact Sheet ST-381
October 1994
Magnolia macrophylla
Figure 1. Young Bigleaf Magnolia.
Bigleaf Magnolia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This North American native tree is deciduous in
most areas but semi-evergreen in the Deep South (Fig.
1). Bigleaf Magnolia grows slowly to 30 to 40 feet
and spreads 20 to 25 feet forming a rounded, broad
canopy. The leaves of Bigleaf Magnolia are truly
large, 12 to 32 inches long and 7 to 12 inches wide,
when found in the wild and somewhat smaller when
grown in landscapes. These leaves are bright green
above with a fuzzy, silver/grey underside, creating a
beautiful, two-toned effect with each passing breeze.
From May to July the showy, fragrant blossoms
appear, each 8 to 12-inch-wide, ivory-colored bloom
having a slight rose tint at its base. These blooms are
followed by the production of 2.5 to 3-inch-long,
hairy, red, egg-shaped fruits. Bigleaf Magnolia trees
must be 12 to 15-years-of-age before they begin to
bloom.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Magnolia macrophylla
Pronunciation: mag-NO-lee-uh mack-roe-FILL-uh
Common name(s): Bigleaf Magnolia
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-381, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Magnolia macrophylla -- Bigleaf Magnolia Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 18 to 36 inches; 12 to 18 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: No entries found.
Magnolia macrophylla -- Bigleaf Magnolia Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Bigleaf Magnolia.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree may be rather short lived in many
landscape sites unless its cultural requirements are met
fairly closely. Branches break easily in wind storms
and ice-laden branches snap off. The large leaves
decompose slowly after they fall and blow around on
the ground creating litter which some people will find
objectionable. It may be best to locate this tree in a
ground cover bed where leaves can drop and filter
down beneath the low growing plants unseen.
Bigleaf Magnolia should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained soil, and does not
tolerate wet soil or drought. It appears to be
somewhat picky in its requirements. In its native
habitat it is found on rich, moist soils.
Cultivars include ‘Palmberg’, with very large
flowers, and ‘Purple Spotted’, flowers with purple
markings in the center.
Propagation is by seed or softwood cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.