Fact Sheet ST-384
October 1994
Magnolia virginiana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Sweetbay Magnolia.
Sweetbay Magnolia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sweetbay Magnolia is a graceful southern,
evergreen to semi-evergreen, wide columnar tree, ideal
for use as a patio tree or specimen (Fig. 1). It can
grow to a mature height of 40 feet in the north or to
60 feet in the south. Trees glimmer in the wind due to
the whitish-green undersides of the leaves. They are
very noticeable as you drive by them on interstates
along water-logged woodlands. The tree provides
excellent vertical definition in a shrub border or as a
free standing specimen and flourishes in moist, acid
soil such as the swamps in the eastern U.S. and along
stream banks. The creamy-white, lemon-scented
flowers appear from June through September, and are
followed by small red seeds which are used by a
variety of wildlife. It can be trained into a multitrunked, spreading specimen plant, or left with the
central leader intact as a wide column.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Magnolia virginiana
Pronunciation: mag-NO-lee-uh ver-jin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Sweetbay Magnolia, Swamp
Magnolia
Family: Magnoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: espalier; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen; residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-384, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Magnolia virginiana -- Sweetbay Magnolia Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous; evergreen;
semievergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; summer
flowering; very showy (Fig. 3)
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk;
tree wants to grow with several trunks but can be
trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Magnolia virginiana -- Sweetbay Magnolia Page 3
Breakage: resistant
Figure 3. Flower of Sweetbay Magnolia.
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: No entries found.
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Sweetbay Magnolia makes an excellent tree for
planting next to buildings, in narrow alleys or
corridors, or in other urban areas with limited space
for horizontal crown expansion. It has not been
planted extensively in downtown urban areas, but its
flood and drought tolerance and narrow crown
combine to make it a good candidate. It usually
maintains a good, straight central leader, although
occasionally the trunk branches low to the ground
forming a round multi-stemmed, spreading tree. It
should be grown and planted more often.
Sweetbay Magnolia roots easily from softwood
cuttings, grows freely near coastal areas, and is
happiest in southern climates. It is thriving in the
Auburn Shade Tree Evaluation trials in Alabama
without irrigation. However, in the confined soil
spaces typical of some urban areas, occasional
irrigation is recommended.
The species is deciduous in USDA hardiness zones
7 and 8 (evergreen farther south) but the variety
australis and cultivar ‘Henry Hicks’ are evergreen;
‘Havener’ has larger flower petals.
Pests and Diseases
Scales sometimes infest foliage and twigs,
particularly on dry sites where the tree is under stress.
Tulip-Poplar weevil (sassafras weevil) feeds as a
leaf miner when young and chews holes in the leaves
as an adult.
Leaf spots occasionally occur on the foliage but
are of little concern.