Fact Sheet ST-400
October 1994
Malus hupehensis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Tea Crabapple.
Tea Crabapple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Flowering Tea Crabapple is composed of strong,
spreading branches which form a broad, vase-shaped
silhouette, 15 to 20 feet tall and 20 feet wide (Fig. 1).
The main branches are usually trained to grow from
one point on the trunk and these grow long and branch
infrequently, forming an open canopy which allows
light to easily pass. Abundant fragrant, light pink to
white blooms appear in springtime, each 1.5-inchdiameter blossom starting out as a tight, deep pink
bud. The small, half-inch fruits which follow are
outstanding, their greenish-yellow faces endowed with
blushing red cheeks. Fruit is very attractive to birds.
The dark grey/brown, flaking bark is quite attractive
and is shown off to its best advantage when the trees
are grown in containers or as an espalier.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Malus hupehensis
Pronunciation: MAY-lus hew-peh-EN-sis
Common name(s): Tea Crabapple, Flowering Tea
Crabapple
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
espalier; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: spreading; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-400, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Malus hupehensis -- Tea Crabapple Page 2
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Malus hupehensis -- Tea Crabapple Page 3
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Figure 3. Foliage of Tea Crabapple.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Crabapples are also useful as median trees where
the fruit will fall away from pedestrians. Placed in the
lawn area as an accent so they receive occasional
irrigation, Crabapple will give you years of wonderful
flowers and showy fruit. It is best to locate them
away from a patio or other hard surface so the fruits
will not fall and cause a mess. Set it back just far
enough so the crown will not overhang the walk, but
close enough so the flowers and fruit can be enjoyed.
Some training and pruning is required to develop
good branch structure. Pruning should be completed
before late spring, to ensure dormant flower buds are
not removed. Unpruned, open-grown trees branch low
and these branches droop to touch the ground. The
spreading canopy makes this tree best suited for
specimen use. It should be occasionally thinned to
eliminate water sprouts or crossed-branches. This
allows for better air circulation through the crown and
helps reduce disease.
Flowering Tea Crabapple grows in moist, welldrained, acid soil in full sun locations for best
flowering. They are not recommended for sandy soil
due to their inability to tolerate extended drought, but
any other soil is suitable, including well-drained clay.
Not city tolerant. Crabapples grow well in the Texas
panhandle but are not extremely drought tolerant and
are not well suited for high pH soil.
Contact the Ornamental Crabapple Society,
Morton Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois 60532 for more
information on Crabapples.
Propagated by seed.
Pests
Aphids infest branch tips and suck plant juices.
Fall webworm makes nests on the branches and
feeds inside the nest. Small nests can be pruned out
or sprayed with Bacillus thuringiensis.
Scales of various types are usually controlled with
horticultural oil.
Mites are too small to see easily so can cause
much foliage discoloration before being detected.
Mites are usually controlled with horticultural oil.
Tent caterpillar builds tents or nests in trees in
early summer or late spring. Feeding occurs outside
the nest. Small nests are pruned out or simply pulled
from the tree and caterpillars crushed. Do not burn
nests while they are still in the tree since this injures
the tree and could start an uncontrolled fire.
Diseases
There is some susceptibility to fire blight.
Scab infection takes place early in the season and
dark olive green spots appear on the leaves. In late
summer the infected leaves fall off when they turn
yellow with black, spots. Infected fruits have black,
slightly raised spots.
Fire blight susceptible trees have blighted branch
tips. Leaves on infected branch tips turn brown or
black, droop, and hang on the branches. The leaves
look scorched as by a fire. The trunk and main
branches become infected when the bacteria are
washed down the branches. Cankers form and are
separated from adjacent healthy bark by a crack. The
infected bark may be shredded.
Powdery mildew is a fungus which coats leaves
with mycelia resembling white powder.
Rust causes brown to rusty-orange spots on the
leaves. Badly spotted leaves fall prematurely.
Redcedars are the alternate host.
Crabapples are subject to several canker diseases.
Prune out infected branches, avoid unnecessary
wounding, and keep trees healthy.