Fact Sheet ST-401
October 1994
Malus sargentii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Sargent Crabapple.
Sargent Crabapple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sargent Crabapple is a dwarf, deciduous tree,
forming a dense, wide-spreading, irregularly-rounded
silhouette, six to eight feet high by 8 to 10 feet wide
(Fig. 1). The small, fragrant, springtime blossoms start
out as red or pink buds but open to sparkling white
flowers. The small, dark red, persistent fruits which
follow are extremely popular with birds and other
wildlife. They can create a litter problem beneath the
canopy as the fruit droops in fall and winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Malus sargentii
Pronunciation: MAY-lus sar-JEN-tee-eye
Common name(s): Sargent Crabapple
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
espalier; screen; trainable as a standard; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 6 to 12 feet
Spread: 8 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; yellow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-401, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Malus sargentii -- Sargent Crabapple Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Malus sargentii -- Sargent Crabapple Page 3
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
Figure 3. Foliage of Sargent Crabapple.
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This dense, compact spreading shrub or small tree
makes an outstanding specimen around a residential or
commercial landscape. Select a single-trunked tree for
street and parking lot locations. It looks great growing
out of a low groundcover, located in a bed with lowgrowing shrubs, or placed toward the rear of a shrub
border. A row would make a nice screen during the
summer months.
Sargent Crabapple grows in moist, well-drained,
acid soil in full sun locations for best flowering and
disease resistance. They are not recommended for
sandy soil due to their inability to tolerate drought, but
any other soil is suitable, including clay. Unlike many
other Crabapples, Sargent Crabapple is only slightly
susceptible to scab, fireblight, and leaf spot. This
makes it one of the best for the South. Crabapples
grow well in the Texas panhandle but are not
extremely drought tolerant and are not well suited for
high pH soil.
Contact the Ornamental Crabapple Society,
Morton Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois 60532 for more
information on Crabapples.
Pests
Aphids infest branch tips and suck plant juices.
Fall webworm makes nests on the branches and
feeds inside the nest. Small nests can be pruned out
or sprayed with Bacillus thuringiensis.
Scales of various types are usually controlled with
horticultural oil.
Mites are too small to see easily so can cause
much foliage discoloration before being detected.
Mites are usually controlled with horticultural oil.
Tent caterpillar builds tents or nests in trees in
early summer or late spring. Feeding occurs outside
the nest. Small nests are pruned out or simply pulled
from the tree and caterpillars crushed. Spray with
Bacillus thuringiensis. Do not burn nests while they
are still in the tree since this injures the tree and could
start an uncontrolled fire.
Diseases
Sargent Crabapple shows good disease-resistance.
Scab infection takes place early in the season and
dark olive green spots appear on the leaves. In late
summer the infected leaves fall off when they turn
yellow with black, spots. Infected fruits have black,
slightly raised spots. Use resistant varieties.
Fire blight susceptible trees have blighted branch
tips. Leaves on infected branch tips turn brown or
black, droop, and hang on the branches. The leaves
look scorched as by a fire. The trunk and main
branches become infected when the bacteria are
washed down the branches. Cankers form and are
separated from adjacent healthy bark by a crack. The
infected bark may be shredded. Use resistant cultivars
when available.
Powdery mildew is a fungus which coats leaves
with mycelia resembling white powder.
Rust causes brown to rusty-orange spots on the
leaves. Badly spotted leaves fall prematurely.
Redcedars are the alternate host.
Crabapples are subject to several canker diseases.
Prune out infected branches, avoid unnecessary
wounding, and keep trees healthy.