Fact Sheet ST-399
October 1994
Malus floribunda
Figure 1. Mature Japanese Flowering Crabapple.
Japanese Flowering Crabapple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This is one of the best Crabapples for form and
flower, reaching 15 to 25 feet in height and creating a
broad, rounded, densely-branched canopy (Fig. 1). It
is also disease resistant, an important attribute for
crabapples. The profusion of fragrant, 1 to 1.5-inchdiameter blooms begin as beautiful deep pink to red
buds, eventually fading to a glistening white as they
open. From August to October, the yellow and red
fruits appear, providing a popular food for wildlife or
they can be harvested to make a delicious jelly. They
can create a litter problem on hard surface beneath the
canopy.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Malus floribunda
Pronunciation: MAY-lus flor-ih-BUN-duh
Common name(s): Japanese Flowering Crabapple
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
espalier; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; near a deck or patio;
trainable as a standard; specimen; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-399, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Malus floribunda -- Japanese Flowering Crabapple Page 2
Fall color: yellow
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Malus floribunda -- Japanese Flowering Crabapple Page 3
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Flowering Crabapple.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Japanese Flowering Crabapple requires very little
pruning but any that is needed should be completed
before late spring, to ensure dormant flower buds are
not removed. Trees used as street trees should be
trained to develop a central trunk and should be
occasionally thinned to eliminate water sprouts or
crossed-branches, and to open up the crown. This
allows for better air circulation through the crown and
helps reduce disease.
Crabapples are also useful as median trees where
the fruit will fall away from pedestrians. Placed in the
lawn area as an accent so they receive occasional
irrigation, Crabapple will give you years of wonderful
flowers and showy fruit. It is best to locate them
away from a patio or other hard surface so the fruits
will not fall and cause a mess. Set it back just far
enough so the crown will not overhang the walk, but
close enough so the flowers and fruit can be enjoyed.
Japanese Flowering Crabapple grows in moist,
well-drained, acid soil in full sun locations for best
flowering. They are not recommended for sandy soil
due to their inability to tolerate drought, but any other
soil is suitable, including clay. Crabapples grow well
in the Texas panhandle but are not extremely drought
tolerant and are not well suited for high pH soil.
Contact the Ornamental Crabapple Society,
Morton Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois 60532 for more
information on Crabapples.
Pests
Aphids infest branch tips and suck plant juices.
Fall webworm makes nests on the branches and
feeds inside the nest. Small nests can be pruned out
or sprayed with Bacillus thuringiensis.
Scales of various types are usually controlled with
horticultural oil.
Mites are too small to see easily so can cause
much foliage discoloration before being detected.
Mites are usually controlled with horticultural oil.
Tent caterpillar builds tents or nests in trees in
early summer or late spring. Feeding occurs outside
the nest. Small nests are pruned out or simply pulled
from the tree and caterpillars destroyed. Do not burn
nests while they are still in the tree since this injures
the tree and could start an uncontrolled fire.
Diseases
Although disease resistant, trees are slightly
susceptible to scab and powdery mildew and have
some susceptibility to fireblight.
Scab infection takes place early in the season and
dark olive green spots appear on the leaves. In late
summer the infected leaves fall off when they turn
yellow. Infected fruits have black, slightly raised
spots.
Fire blight susceptible trees have blighted branch
tips. Leaves on infected branch tips turn brown or
black, droop, and hang on the branches. The leaves
look scorched as by a fire. The trunk and main
branches become infected when the bacteria are
washed down the branches. Cankers form and are
separated from adjacent healthy bark by a crack. The
infected bark may be shredded.
Powdery mildew is a fungus which coats leaves
with mycelia resembling white powder.
Rust causes brown to rusty-orange spots on the
leaves. Badly spotted leaves fall prematurely.
Redcedars are the alternate host.
Crabapples are subject to several canker diseases.
Prune out infected branches, avoid unnecessary
wounding, and keep trees healthy.