Fact Sheet ST-402
October 1994
Malus spp.
Figure 1. Mature Crabapple.
Crabapple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Crabapples are best grown in a sunny location
with good air circulation and have no particular soil
preferences, except soil should be well-drained (Fig.
1). Root pruned trees transplant most easily. Tree
size, flower color, fruit color, and growth and
branching habit vary considerably with the cultivar
grown but many grow about 20 feet tall and wide. A
few Crabapples have good fall color and doubleflowered types hold blossoms longer than singleflowered cultivars. Some Crabapples are alternate
bearers, blooming heavily only every other year.
Crabapples are grown for their showy flowers and
attractive, brightly-colored fruit.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Malus spp.
Pronunciation: MAY-lus species
Common name(s): Crabapple
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
espalier; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; trainable as a standard; narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 25 feet
Spread: 10 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading; upright; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-402, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Malus spp. -- Crabapple Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; red; white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; orange; red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Malus spp. -- Crabapple Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of Crabapple.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Plants are used for specimens, patios (smallfruiting types), and along streets to create a warm
glow of color each spring. Most are attractive during
the summer, bearing glossy green foliage. Popular
around overhead powerlines due to their small stature,
a row of Crabapples along each side of the street or
median strip can "make" a neighborhood. Select
plants which have been grafted onto EMLA 106 or
111 rootstock to reduce root suckering.
Crabapple is well-adapted to compacted urban soil,
tolerates drought and poor drainage well and is
somewhat tolerate of salt-spray. Well adapted to all
areas within its hardiness zone range, including Texas
and Oklahoma. Very adaptable tree. Do not
overfertilize since this could increase the incidence of
disease. Select only from disease-resistant cultivars.
Crabapples grow well in the Texas panhandle but are
not extremely drought tolerant and are not well suited
for high pH soil.
Large-fruited types can create a maintenance
problem since rotting fruits attract insects, rodents, and
are quite messy. Some Crabapples sprout vigorously
from the roots and these will require regular pruning to
maintain an attractive tree. Trees used as street trees
will require regular pruning early in their life to train
lower branches for pedestrian and vehicle clearance.
There are hundreds of Crabapple cultivars with
single or double, red, pink, or white flowers, and
varying fruit size. Many are cultivars of Malus
baccata and Malus floribunda. Since disease
resistance can vary depending on where a particular
cultivar is grown, be sure to choose a cultivar which
has been shown to be resistant to disease in your area.
Your urban forestry program could suffer if you plant
the wrong cultivar but it could blossom if the correct
ones are installed.
Malus adapted for street tree and urban use
include ‘Adams’, ‘Bob White’, ‘David’, ‘Donald
Wyman’, ‘Profusion’, ‘Red Splendor’ and Malus
floribunda. Be sure to specify tree form plants for
street tree use since branching may be too low on trees
grown for specimen use.
White flowered cultivars include: ‘Baccata
Columnaris’ - narrow crown, white flowers, red or
yellow fruit; ‘Baccata Gracilis’ - slow-growing,
shrub-like, white flowers, fruit small and dark red,
annual bearer; ‘Baccata Jackii’ - upright form, white
flowers, bright red fruit, annual bearer, also good to
excellent disease resistance; ‘Callaway’ - pink buds,
white flowers, red fruit; ‘David’ - pink buds open to
white flowers, scarlet fruit, good to excellent disease
resistance; ‘Dolgo’ - pink buds, white flowers, large
red fruits; ‘Donald Wyman’ - disease-resistant but
susceptible to fire blight, glossy red showy fruit;
‘Ellwangeriana’ - red fruit, disease-resistant;
‘Floribunda’ - pink to red bud opens to single white
flower, yellow or red fruit - commonly available;
‘Gloriosa’ - pink bud opens to white flower, red, large
fruit; ‘Golden Hornet’ - upright arching habit, white
flower, yellow fruit; ‘Gorgeous’ - pink bud opens to
large, white flower, red to orange fruit; ‘Harvest Gold’
- white flowers followed by yellow fruits;
‘Hupehensis’ - Tea Crabapple - pink buds open to
white flowers, greenish fruit; ‘Katherine’ - double
flowers opening pink, fading to white, fruit yellow and
red; ‘Mary Potter’ - pink buds open to single white
flowers, red and fairly large fruit, susceptible to scab
and powdery mildew; ‘Red Jade’ - weeping habit,
white flowers, red fruit persisting after leaves drop;
‘Sargenti’ - dwarf, pink bud opens to white flowers,
small dark red fruit; ‘Snowdrift’ - white flowers,
orange red fruit; ‘Tanner’ - white flowers, red fruits,
susceptible to diseases; ‘Tschonoski’ - white flowers,
vigorous growth, good bronze red fall color, fruit
Malus spp. -- Crabapple Page 4
brownish; ‘White Angel’ - white flowers, glossy red
fruit persisting into winter; ‘White Candle’ - pink buds
open to white flowers, red fruit, upright growth habit;
‘Zumi Calocarpa’ - white flowers, bright red persistent
fruit.
Pink flowered cultivars include: ‘Arnoldiana’ -
red buds, pale pink to white flowers, red and yellow
fruits, susceptible to diseases; ‘Barbara Ann’ - double
pink flowers; ‘Beverly’ - pink flowers, small, bright
red fruit, upright open habit; ‘Brandywine’ - double,
pink flowers, foliage tinged reddish; ‘Candied Apple’ -
red buds and pink flowers, persistent bright red fruits;
‘Coralburst’ - pink flowers, a dwarf about eight feet
tall; ‘Dorothea’ - red buds, pink flowers, yellow fruits,
susceptible to scab; ‘Hopa’ - pink flowers, red and
yellow fruit, extremely susceptible to scab;
‘Margaret’ - disease-resistant; ‘Mount Arbor Special’ -
disease-resistant, red fruit; ‘Oekonomierath
Echtermayer’ - somewhat weeping habit, red buds,
pink flowers, red fruits; ‘Pink Perfection’ - pink
flowers, susceptible to scab; ‘Prairie Rose’ - double
pink flowers, no fruit; ‘Radiant’ - red buds, pink
flowers, persistent red fruits, susceptible to scab; ‘Van
Eseltine’ - double pink flowers, columnar; ‘Velvet
Pillar’ - upright form, pink flowers, red fruit and
purple foliage; ‘Weeping Candied Apple’ - pink
flowers and red fruit on horizontal to pendulous
branches.
Cultivars with red flowers include: ‘American
Beauty’ - double, red flowers, susceptible to scab;
‘Centurion’ - a columnar growth habit, red flowers
followed by bright red, persistent fruits; ‘Indian
Magic’ - red flowers, maroon fall color, small red
fruit, persistent; ‘Purpurea Lemoinei’ - dark rose color
flowers, alternate bearing; ‘Profusion’ - red flowers
and fruit; ‘Red Baron’ - red flowers, susceptible to
scab; ‘Red Silver’ - red flowers, red fruit, susceptible
to scab; ‘Red Splendor’ - red buds, red to pink
flowers, red fruit, susceptible to scab; ‘Royal Ruby’ -
double red flowers, sparse red fruit, susceptible to
scab; ‘Royalty’ - red flowers, red fruits, young foliage
purple, susceptible to scab; ‘Selkirk’ - red flowers, red
fruits, susceptible to diseases; ‘Sparkler’ - red flowers,
red fruits; ‘Tomiko’ - disease-resistant, reddish-purple
blooms; ‘Wisley’ - red flowers.
One of the best Crabapples for the south is Malus
x Callaway.
Disease-resistant cultivars include: ‘David’,
‘Dolga’, ‘Donald Wyman’, ‘Ellwangeriana’, ‘Inglis’,
‘Jackii’, ‘Jewelberry’, ‘Margaret’, ‘Mary Potter’
‘Mount Arbor Special’, ‘Prairifire’, ‘Professor
Sprenger’, ‘Tomiko’. Contact the Ornamental
Crabapple Society, Morton Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois
60532 for more information on Crabapples.
Pests
Aphids infest branch tips and suck plant juices,
and are quite common. They can deform newly
emerging foliage and secret honey dew creating a
sticky mess beneath the tree, but will not kill the tree.
Fall webworm makes nests on the branches and
feeds on foliage inside the nest. Small nests can be
pruned out or sprayed with Bacillus thuringiensis.
Controlling severe infestations may require other
chemicals.
Scales of various types are controlled with
horticultural oil.
Borers can be a problem on stressed trees.
Mites are too small to see easily so they can cause
much foliage discoloration before being detected.
Mites can be controlled to a degree with horticultural
oil, but other chemicals are often required by the time
mites are detected. The mite infestation can also be
severe by the time foliage chlorosis or bronzing is
evident.
Eastern tent caterpillar builds tents or nests in trees
in early summer or late spring. Feeding occurs on
foliage outside the nest. Defoliation can be extensive
if infestation is severe, and repeated defoliations for
several years can weaken trees. Small nests can be
removed by pruning them from the tree. Spray with
Bacillus thuringiensis or other approved chemical. Do
not burn nests while they are still in the tree.
Diseases
Many selections are fairly susceptible to disease.
Select from the disease-resistant ones.
Scab infection takes place early in the season and
dark olive green spots appear on the leaves. In late
summer the infected leaves fall off when they turn
yellow. Infected fruits have black, slightly raised
spots. Use resistant varieties to help avoid this severe
problem.
Fire blight susceptible trees have blighted branch
tips, particularly when the tree is growing rapidly.
Malus spp. -- Crabapple Page 5
Leaves on infected branch tips turn brown or black,
droop, and hang on the branches. The leaves look
scorched as by a fire. The trunk and main branches
become infected when the bacteria are washed down
the branches. Cankers form and are separated from
adjacent healthy bark by a crack. The infected bark
may be shredded. Use resistant cultivars when
available since severe infections on susceptible trees
can kill the tree.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white fungal
growth resembling powder.
Cedar apple rust causes brown to rusty-orange
spots on the leaves. Badly spotted leaves fall
prematurely, and defoliation can be heavy. Redcedars (Juniperus virginiana) are the alternate host.
Crabapples are subject to several canker diseases.
Prune out infected branches, avoid unnecessary
wounding, and keep trees healthy.