Fact Sheet ST-397
October 1994
Malus baccata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Siberian Crabapple.
Siberian Crabapple1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
One of the many selections of flowering
Crabapple, Siberian Crabapple is a deciduous tree with
a rounded canopy of spreading branches, ultimately
reaching 20 to 50 feet in height (Fig. 1). The very
fragrant blooms appear in great abundance, and the
single, 1.5-inch-diameter flowers are pink when in bud
but open up to white. The blooms are followed in fall
by long-lasting, bright red or yellow fruits which are
very popular with the birds or can be used to make a
delicious jelly. Some selections make a mess of a
walk or driveway as the fruit falls in the fall and
winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Malus baccata
Pronunciation: MAY-lus back-AY-tuh
Common name(s): Siberian Crabapple
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
espalier; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; trainable as a standard; narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 35 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-397, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Malus baccata -- Siberian Crabapple Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Malus baccata -- Siberian Crabapple Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Figure 3. Foliage of Siberian Crabapple.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Pruning should be completed by late spring to
ensure next year’s flower buds are not removed. Trees
normally branch low, but train to develop a central
trunk if planting along a street or other area where
pedestrian or vehicle clearance is required. Some low
branches will probably need removing as the tree
grows to allow for clearance. Crabapples need
occasional thinning to eliminate water sprouts or
crossed-branches and to open up the crown, to help
prevent leaf diseases. The crown is normally full of
foliage creating dense shade.
Crabapple selections with upright branches make
great street trees where a small tree is needed. Do not
plant those with a low-branching, spreading form
along a street or in a parking lot as the tree will
require regular pruning and will not be able to develop
properly. But the low-branching types make
wonderful specimens where there is adequate room for
horizontal spread, or in a wide highway median.
Siberian Crabapple grows in moist, well-drained,
acid soil in full sun locations for best flowering and
disease resistance. It is not extremely drought tolerant
and not really adapted to alkaline soil, and not for
extreme west Texas. Grows very well on the Texas
panhandle, where there are a number of apple
orchards.
The cultivar ‘Columnaris’ grows in USDA
hardiness zones 4 to 8a, has single white blooms,
upright columnar growth, 30 feet high and eight feet
wide, yellow fruit blushed red, reportedly very
susceptible to scab and fireblight; ‘Jackii’, USDA
hardiness zones 2 to 7, upright-spreading, grows 20 to
30 feet high and 15 feet wide, has pink-tinged white
buds, purplish or maroon-red fruit, is reportedly
disease-resistant. There are many, many cultivars - be
sure to select those which are disease-resistant.
Contact the Ornamental Crabapple Society, Morton
Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois 60532 for more information
on Crabapples.
Trees produced on their own roots are preferred.
Grafted or budded trees are more uniform in habit and
performance than seedling trees.
Pests
Aphids infest branch tips and suck plant juices.
Fall webworm makes nests on the branches and
feeds inside the nest. Small nests can be pruned out
or sprayed with Bacillus thuringiensis.
Scales of various types are usually controlled with
horticultural oil.
Mites are too small to see easily so can cause
much foliage discoloration before being detected.
Mites are usually controlled with horticultural oil.
Tent caterpillar builds tents or nests in trees in
early summer or late spring. Feeding occurs outside
the nest. Small nests are pruned out or simply pull the
nest out of the tree and crush the caterpillars. Do not
burn nests while they are still in the tree since this can
cause severe damage to the tree and could start an
uncontrolled fire.
Diseases
Siberian Crabapple is susceptible to scab.
Infection takes place early in the season and dark olive
green spots appear on the leaves. In late summer the
infected leaves fall off when they turn yellow with
black, spots. Infected fruits have black, slightly raised
spots. Use resistant varieties.
Malus baccata -- Siberian Crabapple Page 4
Fire blight susceptible trees have blighted branch
tips. Leaves on infected branch tips turn brown or
black, droop, and hang on the branches. The leaves
look scorched as by a fire. The trunk and main
branches become infected when the bacteria are
washed down the branches. Cankers form and are
separated from adjacent healthy bark by a crack. The
infected bark may be shredded. Use resistant cultivars
when available, and do not over-fertilize.
Powdery mildew is a fungus which coats leaves
with mycelia resembling white powder.
Rust causes brown to rusty-orange spots on the
leaves. Badly spotted leaves fall prematurely.
Redcedars are the alternate host.
Crabapples are subject to several canker diseases.
Prune out infected branches, avoid unnecessary
wounding, and keep trees healthy.