Fact Sheet ST-404
October 1994
Mangifera indica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Mango.
Mango1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
An abundant harvest of juicy, red-gold fruit and
attractive dark green, tropical foliage make Mango a
popular home landscape item in very large yards for
warm climates (Fig. 1). The trees grows to be 30 to
45 feet tall and almost 50 feet wide, so allow plenty of
room for growth. New foliage is a brilliant purple-red,
and flower and fruit clusters extend well beyond the
long, glossy leaves. The tree is covered with very
showy, white flower spikes in March and early April.
Mango trees grow quickly into round, multibranched,
dense, spreading shade trees but placement is limited
due to the falling fruit. Some people are allergic to
the pollen, the sap and even the fruit.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Mangifera indica
Pronunciation: man-JIFF-er-uh IN-dih-kuh
Common name(s): Mango
Family: Anacardiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: fruit tree; hedge; screen; shade tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 45 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-404, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Mangifera indica -- Mango Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 12 to 18 inches; 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Mangifera indica -- Mango Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Mango.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Mango trees grow best in full sun on fertile, welldrained soils and should have ample moisture. Leaf,
flower, twig and fruit litter is a constant nuisance for
some, and branches are subject to breakage during
severe windstorms. It seems like something is always
falling from a Mango tree to litter the lawn. Place it
in a bed with other plants to hide the litter.
There are several cultivars available which have
been selected for fruit quality: ‘Keitt’, ‘Hent’,
‘Edward’, ‘Glenn’, ‘Haden’ and others are best for
Florida; ‘Alolia’, ‘Edgehill’, ‘Haden’, ‘Manila’ and
others are recommended for California.
Propagation is by budding or veneer grafting on
seedling rootstocks.
Pests
Scales followed by sooty mold and Mediterranean
fruit fly are pests of this tree.
Diseases
Anthracnose on fruit and leaves is a serious
problem for Mango.