Fact Sheet ST-406
October 1994
Melia azedarach
Figure 1. Mature Chinaberry.
Chinaberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chinaberry is a round, deciduous, shade tree,
reaching 30 to 40 feet at maturity and growing five to
10 feet during the first and second year after seed
germination (Fig. 1). Growth slows as the tree reaches
15 or 20 feet tall. It is successfully grown in a wide
variety of situations, including alkaline soil where
other trees might fail. Truly an urban survivor,
Chinaberry has become naturalized in much of the
south.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Melia azedarach
Pronunciation: MEEL-ee-uh uh-ZEE-duh-rack
Common name(s): Chinaberry
Family: Meliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: not recommended for planting; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; odd pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: lobed; incised; serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-406, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Melia azedarach -- Chinaberry Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: lavender
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Melia azedarach -- Chinaberry Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinaberry.
The clusters of lilac flowers are fragrant in the
evening but are often hidden by the emerging foliage.
The leaves turn a vivid yellow for a short time in the
fall. The golden yellow fruit is quite attractive as it
persists on the tree during the fall and winter. When
eaten in quantities, the fruit is poisonous to people but
not to birds. The wood is very brittle but it has been
used in cabinet making.
Chinaberry is considered a "weed" tree in the
southeastern U.S. and so it is not usually available
from nurseries. It is killed back to the ground in the
northern end of its range and is often seen as a
several-year-old sprout. Many people despise the tree
because it has taken over waste areas and other
disturbed soil areas, and has naturalized over large
areas of the south. It grows anywhere in any soil
except wet soil. But with proper pruning to create a
well-formed trunk and branch structure, the plant could
improve its reputation. If you have one and would
like to increase its life-span, prune to open up the
crown to encourage development of a few well-spaced
major limbs. You will not find anyone recommending
planting this tree but fine examples of the tree can be
found growing in the worst soil.
Propagation is from seed or root cuttings.
The cultivar ‘Umbracultiformis’ has a dome-like
form and could be the plant seen commonly in some
wild stands. It is often sold as Texas Umbrella-Tree.
It would be nice to find a fruitless selection.
Pests and Diseases
Scale, whitefly and sooty mold infest Chinaberry.
Leaf spot causes premature defoliation.