Fact Sheet ST-407
October 1994
Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Figure 1. Middle-aged Dawn Redwood.
Dawn Redwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Dawn Redwood grows in a perfect pyramid 70 to
90 feet tall and was known from fossils before living
plants were discovered in China (Fig. 1). It is similar
in appearance to Bald Cypress. Although it looks like
an evergreen, the needles are deciduous. The orangered to brown trunk base is the most outstanding part of
the tree. It tapers and thickens quickly with 8 to 12
large buttress-like root flares extending several feet up
the tree in a manner unlike any other tree except some
tropical trees. As with any other tree, butt flare
(increased caliper at the base of the trunk) can be
reduced somewhat by removing the lower branches at
an early age. The small, upright-spreading branches
are well-attached to the typically straight trunk and
make for excellent climbing. The tree requires little if
any pruning to maintain the pyramidal form.
Lightning protection is recommended for older trees
since they usually grow taller than most others.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Pronunciation: met-uh-see-KWOY-uh
glip-toe-stroe-BOY-deez
Common name(s): Dawn Redwood
Family: Taxodiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; screen;
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-407, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Metasequoia glyptostroboides -- Dawn Redwood Page 2
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 70 to 90 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; should be grown with a
single leader; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Metasequoia glyptostroboides -- Dawn Redwood Page 3
Current year twig color: brown; green
Figure 3. Foliage of Dawn Redwood.
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree has been used primarily as a specimen,
but there are reports of it being very tolerant of air
pollution and it has done well as a street tree with
lower branches removed. Lower branches should be
left on the tree for most other uses to enjoy the
graceful form and delightful foliage. Do not plant in
soil with a high pH.
The tree grows rapidly but late season growth may
be injured by early frosts. The preferred soil is moist
and moderately fertile, but Metasequoia does not
appear to be impacted by drought, having survived in
urban landscapes during recent summer droughts. It
will also tolerate wet soil. It appears to be adapted to
clay soil and grows best when located on continually
moist sites with slightly acidic soil.
Propagation is from seeds or cuttings taken in late
summer.
The cultivar ‘National’ grows to 85 feet tall.
Pests and Diseases
Relatively free of pests, except for a canker which
has been reported recently.