Fact Sheet ST-408
October 1994
Morus alba fruitless cultivars
Figure 1. Middle-aged White Mulberry.
White Mulberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This group of mulberries is fruitless, a definite
plus when compared to the mess created by the
abundant fruits of the common White Mulberry (Fig.
1). The plant quickly forms a dark green mass of
foliage from a short trunk, or group of trunks. This
gives many people reason to plant the tree. However,
it is quite sensitive to ice damage, has invasive surface
roots and drops leaves in summer.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Morus alba fruitless cultivars
Pronunciation: MOE-russ AL-buh
Common name(s): White Mulberry
Family: Moraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; shade tree; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 30 to 45 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; dentate; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-408, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Morus alba fruitless cultivars -- White Mulberry Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fruit
There is no fruit on this tree.
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Fruitless White Mulberry should be grown in full
sun or partial shade on any well-drained soil.
Although it is tolerant of air pollution and dry
conditions, the tree will perform its best on moist soils.
Leaves often drop in dry weather.
The species is invasive and gruits cause a mess on
walks and driveways. For this reason, only fruitless
cultivars are recommended.
Propagation is by cuttings or grafts.
Morus alba fruitless cultivars -- White Mulberry Page 3
Fruitless cultivars include: ‘Bellaire’, ‘Chaparral’,
Figure 3. Foliage of White Mulberry.
‘Hempton’, ‘Stribling’, and ‘Urban’.
Pests
Pests are scale and mites.
Diseases
Leaf spot, bacterial blight, powdery mildew, and
cankers may infect this tree.