Fact Sheet ST-409
October 1994
Musa spp.
Figure 1. Young Banana.
Banana1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Large, fleshy, upright stalks topped with soft,
smooth, arching leaves signifies the Banana plant (Fig.
1). Ranging from six feet for the dwarf species to
over 30 feet for the largest types, Banana trees are
guaranteed to lend a tropical flavor to any landscape
setting. The broad, tender leaves are easily torn by
winds and plants should be located in a sheltered area
to prevent this. The easily-grown Banana tree is ideal
for planters near the pool, located around garden
ponds, or clustered together for an exotic effect. The
unusual reddish-purple flowers are followed by clusters
of upwardly-pointing green fruit, maturing to a
beautiful yellow.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Musa spp.
Pronunciation: MEW-suh species
Common name(s): Banana
Family: Musaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; fruit tree;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 30 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-409, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Musa spp. -- Banana Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
evergreen
Leaf blade length: >36 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: orange; purple
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: No entries found.
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Musa spp. -- Banana Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Banana.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing best on fertile, moist soil, Bananas will
thrive in full sun or partial shade and should be
protected from both wind and cold. Plants respond
well to regular fertilization. Too many suckers should
not be allowed to develop since this will decrease the
ability of any one plant to produce a good bunch of
fruit. By allowing suckers to develop only at periodic
intervals, a succession of fruiting can be obtained.
Banana bunches should be harvested when the fruit is
still green and allowed to ripen in a cool, dark place.
It produces fruit in USDA hardiness zones 8b and 9
only when winter temperatures stay above freezing.
Plants killed to the ground which sprout from the soil
in the spring will not produce fruit until the following
year.
Many different species of Banana are available.
Some ornamental types are grown for foliage or
flowers. Musa coccinea has brilliant red bracts, while
Musa rosea has pink bracts. Both hold up very well
as cut flowers. Musa acuminata, ‘Dwarf Cavendish’,
is one of the best fruit cultivars. It has large bunches
with large fruit and the plant’s small size makes it
easier to protect from wind. The tall-growing
‘Ladyfinger’ has small bunches of small Bananas but
they are very thin-skinned and delicious. Musa
velutina grows three to four feet tall with three-foot
leaves that are green above and bronzy beneath. The
upright pink bracts has orange flowers and yield
velvety pink fruit.
Propagation is by division of the suckers.
Pests
Scales and nematodes are of its two common
pests.
Diseases
Sigatoka leaf-spot, Cercospora leaf-spot, and
Panana disease may infect this tree.