Fact Sheet ST-410
October 1994
Myrica cerifera
Figure 1. Middle-aged Southern Waxmyrtle.
Southern Waxmyrtle1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Multiple, twisted trunks with smooth, light grey
bark, aromatic, olive green leaves, and clusters of
grey-blue, waxy berries on female plants which are
attractive to wildlife are just some of the reasons
Southern Waxmyrtle is such a popular landscape plant
(Fig. 1). Most specimens form a multi-stemmed, open,
rounded canopy of weak trunks and branches. This
rapidly-growing, small, evergreen native tree is capable
of reaching a height of 25 feet with an equal spread
but is usually seen in the 10 to 20-foot range.
Sometimes used as a large shrubbery screen, Southern
Waxmyrtle is ideal for use as a small tree, the lower
limbs removed to reveal its picturesque form. One, or
several clustered together, provide pleasing dappled
shade for terraces or patios.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Myrica cerifera
Pronunciation: MEER-ih-kuh ser-IF-er-uh
Common name(s): Southern Waxmyrtle, Southern
Bayberry
Family: Myricaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; trainable as a
standard; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet
in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-410, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Myrica cerifera -- Southern Waxmyrtle Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; oblanceolate; spatulate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Myrica cerifera -- Southern Waxmyrtle Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Southern Waxmyrtle.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Very tough and easily-grown, Southern Waxmyrtle
can tolerate a variety of landscape settings from full
sun to partial shade, wet swamplands or high, dry and
alkaline areas. Growth is thin in total shade. It is also
very salt-tolerant (soil and aerosol), making it suitable
for seaside applications. It is adapted to parking lot
and street tree planting, especially beneath powerlines,
but branches tend to droop toward the ground, possibly
hindering flow of vehicular traffic if not properly
trained and pruned. Set them back from the road if
used as a street tree so drooping branches will not
hinder traffic. Removing excess shoot growth two
times each year eliminates the tall, lanky branches and
reduces the tendency for branches to droop. Some
landscape managers hedge the crown into a multistemmed dome-shaped topiary. Plants spaced 10 feet
apart, maintained in this manner, can create a nice
canopy of shade for pedestrian traffic.
Plants should be watered well until established and
will then require no further care. The only drawback
to the plant is its tendency to sprout from the roots.
This can be a nuisance as they need to be removed
several times each year to keep the tree looking sharp.
However, in a naturalized garden this thick growth
could be an advantage, since it would provide good
nesting cover for wildlife. Only female trees produce
fruit provided there is a male nearby, but seeds do not
appear to become a weed problem in the landscape.
The cultivar ‘Pumila’ is a dwarf form, less than
three feet high. Myrica pensylvanica, Northern
Bayberry, is a more cold-hardy species and the source
of wax for bayberry candles.
Propagation is by seeds, which germinate easily
and rapidly, tip cuttings, division of the stolons or
transplanting wild plants.
Pests
Caterpillars and mites may occasionally attack the
foliage. Webworms common in some landscapes -
prune to remove infestation.
Diseases
Cankers may form on old branches and trunks and
kill them. Also, a lethal wilt disease caused by the
fungus Fusarium oxysporum and Fusarium spp. has
been recently noted attacking Waxmyrtle plants in
central and south Florida. The vascular tissue is
irregularly stained purple but not decayed as a result of
the disease. Root injury and nitrogen fertilization
encourage the disease.