Fact Sheet ST-411
October 1994
Myrica pensylvanica
Figure 1. Young Northern Bayberry.
Northern Bayberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This shrub is hardy into USDA hardiness zone 2
and reaches a height and spread of six to eight feet
(Fig. 1). The glossy green foliage is followed by
persistent, silvery gray berries on female plants that
provide winter interest. Multiple, twisted trunks with
smooth, light grey bark, aromatic, olive green leaves,
and clusters of grey-blue, waxy berries on female
plants which are attractive to wildlife are just some of
the reasons Bayberry is such a popular landscape
plant. Most specimens form a multi-stemmed, open,
rounded canopy of weak trunks and branches. This
rapidly-growing, small, evergreen native tree is capable
of reaching a height of 25 feet with an equal spread
but is usually seen in the 10 to 20-foot range.
Sometimes used as a large shrubbery screen, Bayberry
is ideal for use as a small tree, the lower limbs
removed to reveal its picturesque form. One, or
several clustered together, provide pleasing dappled
shade for terraces or patios.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Myrica pensylvanica
Pronunciation: MEER-ih-kuh pen-sill-VAN-ih-kuh
Common name(s): Northern Bayberry
Family: Myricaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway; near
a deck or patio; reclamation plant; screen; trainable as
a standard; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-411, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Myrica pensylvanica -- Northern Bayberry Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 6 to 12 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; oblanceolate; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous; fragrant;
semievergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: white
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Myrica pensylvanica -- Northern Bayberry Page 3
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
Figure 3. Foliage of Northern Bayberry.
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Very tough and easily-grown, Bayberry can
tolerate a variety of landscape settings from full sun to
partial shade, wet swamplands or high, dry and
alkaline areas. Growth is thin in total shade.
Bayberry is also very salt-tolerant (soil and aerosol),
making it suitable for seaside applications. It is
adapted to parking lot and street tree planting,
especially beneath powerlines, but branches tend to
droop toward the ground, possibly hindering flow of
vehicular traffic if not properly pruned. Set them back
from the road if used as a street tree so drooping
branches will not hinder traffic. Heading the top back
two times each year eliminates the tall, lanky branches
and reduces the tendency for branches to droop. Some
landscape managers hedge the crown into a multistemmed dome-shaped topiary.
Plants should be watered well until established and
will then require no further care. The only drawback
to the plant is its tendency to sprout from the roots.
This can be a nuisance as they need to be removed
several times each year to keep the tree looking sharp.
However, in a naturalized garden this thick growth
could be an advantage, since it would provide good
nesting cover for wildlife. Only female trees produce
fruit but seeds do not germinate in the landscape.
Pests and Diseases
There are no serious diseases or pests of this tree.