Fact Sheet ST-412
October 1994
Nerium oleander
Figure 1. Middle-aged Oleander.
Oleander1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Oleander is a wonderful easy-care, rounded shrub
or small tree, with long, dark green leaves and an
abundance of single or double, sometimes fragrant
flowers in shades of white, pink, red, or yellow (Fig.
1). Often trained into an attractive small tree, multibranched Oleander also does well as a quick-growing
screen or large specimen planting. Planted on five to
seven foot centers, a row of Oleander makes a nice
screen for a large residence or other large-scale
landscape. A dwarf shrub selection ‘Petite’ is most
suited for residential landscapes due to its small size.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Nerium oleander
Pronunciation: NEER-ee-um oh-lee-AN-der
Common name(s): Oleander
Family: Apocynaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; screen; trainable as a standard; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 18 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-412, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Nerium oleander -- Oleander Page 2
Growth rate: fast
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: orange; pink; red; white; yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; very
showy; year round flowering (Fig. 3)
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Nerium oleander -- Oleander Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Flower of Oleander.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing well with only one yearly fertilization
and springtime pruning, Oleander is one of the easiest
shrubs to care for. Sometimes suckers produced at the
base of the plant will siphon off too much energy and
flowering will be inhibited. These suckers should be
pulled to remove them when they are young and
succulent. The plant can be trained into a short central
leader in the nursery and is often sold as a "standard"
Oleander. It grows into a round-headed ball, flowering
year-round in USDA hardiness zones 9b through 11.
Flowering is reduced in winter in USDA hardiness
zone 9a. Every few years tops of trees in 9a are
injured by cold.
All parts of the plant are poisonous so care must
be taken when locating Oleander near areas frequented
by small children; burning of the trimmings will
produce toxic fumes. Even chewing once or twice on
a leaf or twig can send a person to the hospital.
Oleander survives drought well and is well-suited
to growing on soil too poor for most other shrubs,
even tolerating salt spray, brackish water, and alkaline
soil. It thrives in full sun, appearing too lanky and
flowering little if planted in partial shade. The
Oleander caterpillar can defoliate a plant within a
week or two, and it is common in south and central
Florida. It is commonly planted in highway medians
as a no-maintenance plant. It grows following wet
weather, slowing down in drought, but always looks
good even in powder-dry soil.
Many cultivars are available: ‘Calypso’ has single,
cherry red flowers and is very hardy; ‘Compte
Barthelemy’ has double red flowers; ‘Mrs. Roeding’,
double pink flowers; ‘Sister Agnes’, single pure white
flowers; ‘Isle of Capri’, single, light yellow flowers;
‘Hawaii’, single salmon-pink flowers with yellow
throats; and dwarf cultivars ‘Petite Pink’ and ‘Petite
Salmon’. ‘Variegata’ and ‘Variegatum Plenum’ have
variegated leaves.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
Pest problems are scale and Oleander caterpillar
which can do quite a bit of damage to the foliage if
left unchecked. Oleander caterpillar can defoliate a
plant in a week or two.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.