Fact Sheet ST-419
October 1994
Noronhia emarginata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Madagascar Olive.
Madagascar Olive1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A very tough tree well-suited for coastal and
seaside locations, Madagascar Olive is an attractive,
upright oval, evergreen with six-inch-long, leathery,
olive green leaves and a high tolerance for salt and
wind (Fig. 1). The crown appears to stay well-formed
even right up on the coast where it is exposed to salt
spray. It reaches a height of 20 feet with a 15 to 20-
foot-spread. The inconspicuous but fragrant, small
yellow blooms are followed by one-inch-diameter,
bright yellow fruits, turning to dark purple, with a
sweet, edible, cream-colored flesh, which add to the
tree’s ornamental value. The dropping fruit may be
undesirable to some people when planted near walks
or pavement, but properly located in a bed or lawn is
of little concern.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Noronhia emarginata
Pronunciation: nor-RAWN-ee-uh
ee-mar-jih-NAY-tuh
Common name(s): Madagascar Olive
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
fruit tree; large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet
in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-419, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Noronhia emarginata -- Madagascar Olive Page 2
Crown shape: oval; vase shape
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; year round flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; purple; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; no significant litter problem;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Noronhia emarginata -- Madagascar Olive Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Madagascar Olive.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing easily in full sun or partial shade,
Madagascar Olive is quite adaptable to a wide range of
soils. It works well as a dense screen or windbreak,
and can form an ideal specimen or framing tree for
landscapes with limited room after the lower branches
are removed. A cluster of trees creates a handsome,
informal grouping. This is a tough small tree which is
suitable for many locations. Use it to create shade on
a patio or grow it in a large, heavy container on a
deck. The small size makes it ideal for planting along
streets where there are overhead power lines.
Propagation is by cuttings or seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.