Fact Sheet ST-420
October 1994
Nyssa ogeche
Figure 1. Middle-aged Ogeechee Tupelo.
Ogeechee Tupelo1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
First discovered by William Bartram along the
Ogeechee River in Georgia, Ogeechee-Lime is a lovely
native tree which reaches 40 feet in height and is
pyramidal when young, maturing to a spreading, flattopped crown (Fig. 1). The multiple, irregular
branches emerge from a trunk covered with dark
brown or grey, ridged bark, and the base of the tree
often develops swollen buttress-type roots as it gets
older. The four to six-inch-long, dark green leaves are
joined in early spring by dense, hanging clusters of
small, white blooms. The 1.5-inch-long, showy red
fruits on female trees are produced in abundance and
ripen in autumn. The juice can be used as a substitute
for limes, hence its common name. Fruits can make a
slight mess of a sidewalk, driveway or patio. In
autumn the trees put on a brilliant display of colorful
foliage ranging from vivid yellow to deep purple,
which would make Ogeechee-Lime a popular
landscape choice. Unfortunately, it is usually not
grown by many nurseries.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Nyssa ogeche
Pronunciation: NISS-uh oh-GEE-chee
Common name(s): Ogeechee Tupelo,
Ogeechee-Lime
Family: Nyssaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; shade tree;
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-420, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Nyssa ogeche -- Ogeechee Tupelo Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 35 to 45 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; purple; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Nyssa ogeche -- Ogeechee Tupelo Page 3
Wood specific gravity: 0.46
Figure 3. Foliage of Ogeechee Tupelo.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Since the sex on trees can be determined at an
early age in the nursery, it should be easy to select
male trees. Those may be preferrable since the fruits
on female trees can be somewhat messy on pavement
and walks.
Since it is most often found along streams and in
low-lying areas which are regularly flooded in spring
and winter, Ogeechee-Lime will prefer a moist site on
acid soil. It is well-adapted to sites which are wet for
prolonged periods, once the tree becomes established.
Located in full sun or partial shade, Ogeechee-Lime
will easily adapt to somewhat drier locations but
should be protected from harsh winds. A male
selection would be useful for urban areas since it
would not produce fruit.
Nyssa aquatica is very similar and difficult to
differentiate from Nyssa ogeche.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but it is
occasionally bothered by tupelo leaf miner, scale, rust,
and leaf spot.