Fact Sheet ST-422
October 1994
Nyssa sylvatica
Figure 1. Young Blackgum.
Blackgum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sourgum is a hardwood tree which grows to 75
feet tall, has a medium growth rate, pyramidal shape
with horizontal branches growing from a typically
straight trunk (Fig. 1). But the shape of the crown
varies from tree to tree and, unfortunately, this is
looked upon by some architects as undesirable. As the
tree grows to 10 and 15-years-old, crown form
becomes more uniform among trees. Lower branches
droop with age and will need to be removed if used as
a street tree. Growth habit is similar to pin oak, a tree
which many people are familiar with. Providing a
brilliant display of red to deep purple foliage in the
fall, Sourgum surprises most people since it does not
particularly stand out in the landscape until then. The
small, blue fruits may be considered a litter nuisance
in urban/suburban plantings but are quite popular with
many birds and mammals, and they wash away
quickly.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Nyssa sylvatica
Pronunciation: NISS-uh sill-VAT-ih-kuh
Common name(s): Blackgum, Sourgum, Black
Tupelo
Family: Nyssaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-422, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Nyssa sylvatica -- Blackgum Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 65 to 75 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Nyssa sylvatica -- Blackgum Page 3
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Figure 3. Foliage of Blackgum.
Wood specific gravity: 0.50
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Sourgum prefers a moist, slightly acid soil. Larger
specimens may be difficult to transplant from deep,
well-drained field soil because of its deep roots and
should only be transplanted from the field in the
spring. Therefore, it is usually seen growing in
containers at the nursery. Little pruning is required to
form a well-structured tree since the trunk stays
straight and branches usually grow at wide angles with
the trunk. Sourgum makes a good street or parking lot
tree for suburban neighborhoods, possibly for
downtown areas. It should be used more often for this
purpose but will benefit from occasional irrigation in
droughts. Does amazingly well in wet, compacted
soils typical of many urban areas with highly disturbed
clay soil. It is also somewhat salt-tolerant for planting
along the shore.
Sourgum is rarely attacked by pests, and when it
is they are rarely serious enough to warrant control.
Nyssa sylvatica var. sylvatica grows on moist
sites; var. aquatica has a buttressed and swollen trunk
base and grows in swamps. Nyssa bicolor is very
similar and often confused with Nyssa sylvatica.
Pests
Scales, including Sourgum scale, can be controlled
with horticultural oil.
Forest tent caterpillar can defoliate the tree in the
spring. Unless defoliation is extensive in two or more
successive years, control is not needed.
Diseases
Several fungi cause cankers on Sourgum. As the
cankers enlarge the infected stems die back. Trunk
cankers cause tree dieback. Prune out infected
branches and keep trees healthy.
Leaf spots cause purplish blotches on the upper
leaf surface. Rake up and destroy infected leaves in
the fall to reduce the disease potential for the
following year, if you wish.
Recently a large number of trees have been
discovered dying in the mountains of North Carolina,
Tennessee, Virginia, and Georgia. The causal agent is
unknown but symptoms include leaf spots, branch
cankers, leaves dying and hanging on the tree, and leaf
blotches.