Fact Sheet ST-423
October 1994
Ochrosia elliptica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Ochrosia.
Ochrosia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large, upright, evergreen shrub or small tree
has glossy, leathery leaves and clusters of fragrant,
yellow/white flowers from late summer into winter,
followed by bright red, two-inch-long, poisonous fruit
borne in pairs (Fig. 1). The fruit is poisonous. It will
make a nice tree for a patio area providing shade with
the lower branches removed, or a visual screen of
coarse, dense foliage without growing too tall. It is
suited for planting beneath power lines due to
maximum height of 20 to 25 feet.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ochrosia elliptica
Pronunciation: oh-KROE-zee-uh ee-LIP-tih-kuh
Common name(s): Ochrosia
Family: Apocynaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-423, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ochrosia elliptica -- Ochrosia Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; pleasant
fragrance; showy; summer flowering; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Ochrosia elliptica -- Ochrosia Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Ochrosia.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Salt-tolerant Ochrosia grows well close to the
ocean in full sun or partial shade on a wide range of
soils, including alkaline, and responds well to
fertilizing. It is very drought-tolerant but responds
well to irrigation and fertilizer. Its dark green, dense
foliage makes it ideal for tall screens or at the rear of
a shrub border.
Propagation is by scarified seed or cuttings.
Pests
Pest problems include scale and occasionally
mites. These can be locally troublesome.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.