Fact Sheet ST-426
October 1994
Osmanthus x fortunei
Figure 1. Middle-aged Fortunes Osmanthus.
Fortunes Osmanthus1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large evergreen shrub or small tree is capable
of reaching 15 to 20 feet in height and width but is
most often seen at 10 to 12 feet high with an 8-footspread (Fig. 1). Older plants grow as wide as tall and
develop a vase shape with several main trunks
typically originating close to the ground. The lustrous,
dark-green leaves have paler undersides and are joined
in the fall by a multitude of barely-noticeable, but
extremely fragrant, white blossoms. They perfume a
large area of the landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Osmanthus x fortunei
Pronunciation: oz-MANTH-us x for-TOO-nee-eye
Common name(s): Fortunes Osmanthus
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge;
screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: pectinate; serrate; spiny
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-426, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Osmanthus x fortunei -- Fortunes Osmanthus Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; pleasant
fragrance; inconspicuous and not showy; spring
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; rare
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
With its upright oval to columnar growth habit in
youth, Osmanthus is ideal for use as an unclipped
hedge or trained as a small tree, and should be placed
where its fragrance can be enjoyed. It is often planted
as a hedge or foundation plant, and makes a very
effect screen. Its spiny foliage makes it well-suited for
Osmanthus x fortunei -- Fortunes Osmanthus Page 3
planting as a barrier to help keep people from walking
Figure 3. Foliage of Fortunes Osmanthus.
through an area. Since the flowers are not particularly
showy, people will wonder where the delightful
fragrance is coming from. This is a subtle plant which
should be used more often in Southern landscapes.
Plants thin somewhat in full shade, but form a
dense crown in a sunny or partially shaded location.
Planted on 4 to 6 foot centers, Osmanthus can form a
wall of fragrance during the fall and should be planted
more often. They will not grow as fast as Leyland
Cypress, but think of this Osmanthus as a substitute
for use in a sunny or partially shaded spot. Plants can
be clipped to form a denser canopy, but flowers form
on old growth and removing branches will reduce the
flower display. With time, older plants can be trained
into a small, multi-trunked tree.
Osmanthus should be grown in sun or shade in
well-drained soil. Plants are drought-tolerant once
established. This is one of the most cold tolerant
Osmanthus.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Scales
and nematodes may present a problem, and mushroom
root rot is troublesome when the soil is kept too wet.