Fact Sheet ST-424
October 1994
Osmanthus americanus
Figure 1. Young Devilwood.
Devilwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native to the southeastern United States,
Devilwood is a very attractive, small evergreen tree
which is most commonly seen at 15 to 25 feet in
height and sports lush, dark, olive green leaves
throughout the year (Fig. 1). It is occasionally seen 30
to 40 feet tall in its native habitat and grows slowly.
The clusters of small, white, fragrant, early springtime
flowers are followed by the production of small, dark
blue drupes, ripening in fall and persisting on the tree
until the following spring, if not first consumed by
birds and other wildlife. Its ease of growth, pestresistance, attractive foliage and flowers, and wildlifeattracting fruits would make Devilwood a popular
choice for naturalizing or the mixed shrubbery border.
The trees tolerate heavy pruning particularly well and
may also be used as a hedge. Devilwood is so-named
because the fine-textured wood is difficult to split and
hard to work.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Osmanthus americanus
Pronunciation: oz-MANTH-us uh-mair-ih-KAY-nus
Common name(s): Devilwood, Wild-Olive
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-424, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Osmanthus americanus -- Devilwood Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Osmanthus americanus -- Devilwood Page 3
Current year twig color: brown; green
Figure 3. Foliage of Devilwood.
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Naturally found along streambanks or swamp
margins, Devilwood should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on moist, well-drained soil. Drought
tolerance is moderate once established. The tree is
probably as shade tolerant as any osmanthus. Not
tested as an urban tree but may have some merit in
wet soils.
Propagation is by cuttings or seed, and is difficult
by either.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.