Fact Sheet ST-425
October 1994
Osmanthus fragrans
Figure 1. Mature Sweet Osmanthus.
Sweet Osmanthus1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large evergreen shrub or small tree is capable
of reaching 20 to 25 feet in height and width but is
most often seen at 10 to 12 feet high with an 8-footspread (Fig. 1). Older plants grow as wide as tall and
develop a vase shape with several main trunks
typically originating close to the ground. The lustrous,
medium-green leaves have paler undersides and are
joined from October through March by a multitude of
small, but extremely fragrant, white blossoms. They
perfume a large area of the landscape and can be
showy in some years.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Osmanthus fragrans
Pronunciation: oz-MANTH-us FRAY-granz
Common name(s): Sweet Osmanthus
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; near a deck or patio; screen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: pectinate; serrate; spiny
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-425, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Osmanthus fragrans -- Sweet Osmanthus Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; pleasant
fragrance; showy; spring flowering; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; blue
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Osmanthus fragrans -- Sweet Osmanthus Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Sweet Osmanthus.
With its upright oval to columnar growth habit in
youth, Sweet Osmanthus is ideal for use as an
unclipped hedge or trained as a small tree, and should
be placed where its fragrance can be enjoyed. Since
the flowers are not particularly showy, people will
wonder where the delightful fragrance is coming from.
This is a subtle plant which should be used more often
in Southern landscapes.
Plants thin somewhat in the partial shade, but form
a dense crown in a sunny location. Planted on 4 to 6
foot centers, Sweet Osmanthus can form a wall of
fragrance during the fall, winter and spring and should
be planted more often. They will not grow as fast as
Leyland Cypress, but think of this Osmanthus as a
substitute for use in a sunny spot. Plants can be
clipped to form a denser canopy, but flowers form on
old growth and removing branches will reduce the
flower display. With time, older plants can be trained
into a small, multi-trunked tree.
Sweet Osmanthus should be grown in full sun or
partial shade in well-drained soil. Plants are fairly
drought-tolerant once established but will perform their
best with ample moisture.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Scales
and nematodes may present a problem, and mushroom
root rot is troublesome when the soil is kept too wet.