Fact Sheet ST-428
October 1994
Ostrya virginiana
Figure 1. Middle-aged American Hophornbeam.
American Hophornbeam1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This shade-tolerant tree slowly grows to 50 feet in
height with a 25 to 30-foot spread but is often 25 to
40 feet tall, forming an oval or round canopy (Fig. 1).
Hophornbeam has a lovely yellow fall color, and the
small nutlets, which ripen in summer and fall, are used
by birds and mammals during the winter. Bark is an
attractive orange or grayish brown peeling off in
longitudinal strips. The finely-textured crown casts a
medium or dense shade in full sun, but is more open
in the shade casting a light shadow.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ostrya virginiana
Pronunciation: OSS-tree-uh ver-jin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): American Hophornbeam, Eastern
Hophornbeam
Family: Betulaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; screen; shade tree; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet
wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential
street tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban
areas where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted
soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-428, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ostrya virginiana -- American Hophornbeam Page 2
Crown shape: oval; round
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown; green
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Ostrya virginiana -- American Hophornbeam Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of American Hophornbeam.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This is a rugged tree, tolerant of poor soil
conditions found in urban areas and should be grown
and planted more. Can be purchased as a single or
multi-trunked specimen. Multi-stemmed trees have a
dramatic impact in the landscape with bright bark and
wonderful form. Great for climbing.
Hophornbeam has a shallow root system and will
grow in most soils except those that are wet. It is well
adapted to downtown city plantings provided soil
drainage is good. Often found on dry, rocky slopes
with little soil, Hophornbeam is quite tolerant of
drought and needs little care once established. Locate
it close to people so they can enjoy the wonderful bark
and foliage.
Pests
No pests of this tree are usually serious.
Two-lined chestnut borer may infest
Hophornbeam. Keep trees healthy by regular
fertilization and irrigate soil around tree during
drought periods to reduce susceptibility to borer attack.
Scales are usually controlled with horticultural oil.
Basswood leafminer may cause some leafmining
damage to foliage.
Orange-humped mapleworm may be found feeding
on Ostrya north of Pennsylvania.
Diseases
No diseases of this tree are usually serious.
Canker diseases can cause dieback of individual
branches or entire trees. Prune out diseased branches,
fertilize regularly, and water during dry weather.
Leaf blister causes blistered or deformed leaves
but is not something which needs control.
Leaf spots are generally not serious. Rake up and
destroy infected leaves at the end of the growing
season, if you wish.
Powdery mildew makes a white coating on the
leaves but is otherwise harmless.