Fact Sheet ST-429
October 1994
Oxydendrum arboreum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Sourwood.
Sourwood1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sourwood usually grows as a pyramid or narrow
oval with a more or less straight trunk at a height of
25 to 35 feet but can reach 50 to 60 feet tall with a
spread of 25 to 30 feet (Fig. 1). Occasionally young
specimens have a more open spreading habit
reminiscent of Redbud. Leaves are dark, lustrous
green and appear to weep or hang from the twigs.
Branches droop toward the ground forming a graceful
outline when planted as a single specimen. The
branching pattern and persistent fruit make the tree
interesting in the winter. The mid- to late-summer
flowers are borne in terminal clusters of racemes
which curve upward, creating a graceful effect at
flowering time. The fall color is a striking red and
orange which is rivaled by only a few other trees such
as Blackgum, Chinese Pistache, the pears, and Chinese
Tallowtree. There are few sights that are as striking as
a row of Sourwood in fall color.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Oxydendrum arboreum
Pronunciation: ock-sih-DEN-drum ar-BORE-ee-um
Common name(s): Sourwood, Sorrel-Tree
Family: Ericaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-429, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Oxydendrum arboreum -- Sourwood Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrulate; undulate
Leaf shape: lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Oxydendrum arboreum -- Sourwood Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Sourwood.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree grows slowly, adapts to sun or shade, and
prefers a slightly acid, peaty loam. The tree
transplants easily when young and from containers of
any size. Sourwood grows well in confined soil
spaces with good drainage making it a candidate for
urban plantings but is largely untried as a street tree.
It is reportedly sensitive to air pollution injury.
Irrigation is required during hot, dry weather to keep
leaves on the tree. Reportedly not highly droughttolerant, but there are beautiful specimens in USDA
hardiness zone 7 growing in the open sun in poor clay
with no irrigation.
Pests
Pests are usually not a problem for Sourwood.
Fall webworm can defoliate portions of the tree in
summer and fall but usually control is not needed.
Diseases
Twig blight kills leaves at the branch tips. Trees
in poor health seem to be more susceptible. Prune out
infected branch tips and fertilize. Leaf spots can
discolor some leaves but are not serious other than
causing premature defoliation.