Fact Sheet ST-430
October 1994
Pandanus utilis
Figure 1. Young Screw-pine.
Screw-pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Creating a striking landscape effect wherever it is
used, Screw-Pine has a pyramidal, sometimes irregular,
open, but much-branched silhouette, the smooth, stout
trunks topped with full, graceful heads of long, thin
leaves, three feet long and three inches wide, emerging
spirally from stubby branches (Fig. 1). It is not a true
pine tree. The blue-green foliage color adds to the
striking nature of this exotic tree. The leaves are
edged with small red spines and are used to make mats
and baskets in the tropics. Branches have prominent
leaf scars which encircle the stems. Large brace-roots
emerge from the trunk several feet above the ground,
helping to support the plant. Screw-Pine is capable of
reaching 60 feet in height but is not usually seen over
25 feet in USDA hardiness zone 10 and 11, with a
spread of 15 feet. Growth rate is slow to moderate,
depending upon fertilization and watering schedules,
and Screw-Pine is very popular for use as a specimen
or container planting.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pandanus utilis
Pronunciation: pan-DAY-nus YOO-tih-liss
Common name(s): Screw-pine
Family: Pandanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; specimen; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 12 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-430, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pandanus utilis -- Screw-pine Page 2
Crown shape: pyramidal
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: pectinate; spiny
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 18 to 36 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: orange; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns (Fig. 3)
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Pandanus utilis -- Screw-pine Page 3
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
Figure 3. Trunk of Screw-pine.
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although the male plants possess conspicuous,
fragrant flowers, it is the female plant which is
preferred for landscape use because of the large, eight
to nine-inch, globular fruits which hang from "cords".
The fruits are made up of 100 to 200 tightly
compressed drupes, similar to those of a pineapple,
and change from green to yellow when ripe. There is
only a small amount of edible pulp but the fruits are
quite showy.
Screw-Pine produces fruit when grown in full sun
but young plants may be kept in the shade. Soil
should be well-drained and plants kept well-watered.
Screw-Pine may be considered messy due to the
constant leaf-drop throughout the year.
Veitch Screw-Pine or Ribbon-Plant (Pandanus
veitchii) has white-banded, spiny leaves, does not fruit,
and is often used as a pot plant. Sander Screw-Pine
(Pandanus sanderi) has denser, more tufted foliage
with golden yellow bands from center of leaf to
margin.
Propagation is by seed (soaked 24-hours before
planting), basal sucker division, or large cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but
occasionally scales.