Fact Sheet ST-431
October 1994
Parkinsonia aculeata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Jerusalem-Thorn.
Jerusalem-Thorn1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Loose, flowing, delicate leaflets, a light, airy, lowbranching growth habit with pendulous branch-tips,
and a profusion of small, slightly fragrant, yellow
blooms combine to create this popular, small landscape
tree (Fig. 1). Quickly reaching a height of 20 to 25
feet with a similar spread, this multitrunked deciduous
tree is actually much stronger than its fragile
appearance would suggest. Branch bark often remains
bright green even on several-year-old limbs.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Parkinsonia aculeata
Pronunciation: par-kin-SO-nee-uh
ah-kew-lee-AY-tuh
Common name(s): Jerusalem-Thorn, Retama
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 8B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200
square feet in size); recommended for buffer strips
around parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet
in size); specimen; residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: spreading; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: linear; oblanceolate
Leaflet venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-431, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Parkinsonia aculeata -- Jerusalem-Thorn Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; summer flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; thorns are present on the trunk or
branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Parkinsonia aculeata -- Jerusalem-Thorn Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Jerusalem-Thorn.
Be sure to purchase trees with a well-developed
central leader and upright branches for street and
parking lot plantings to allow for clearance for
vehicles. This can be a tough chore as branches weep
toward the ground as they spread from the tree so
older specimens can be wider than tall. Open-grown
trees are beautiful if left unpruned, forming a fountain
of fine texture. The stems are armed with short, sharp
spines and the trees should be located where they will
not injure passersby.
Thriving in full sun on any well-drained soil,
Jerusalem-Thorn will tolerate heat, drought, alkaline
soil, and salt but not wet, soggy soil. It will grow in
clay only if it drains very well. In spite of its rapid
growth rate, it has strong wood, withstanding harsh
winds with ease due to the open growth habit.
However, the trees have a short life, approximately 15
to 20 years. Poor drainage may account for short life
on many sites, so locate it accordingly in areas where
soil is never wet for more than an hour or two. The
bark is thin and easily injured and the tree appears to
compartmentalize decay poorly. Locate the tree
properly and design the site to minimize trunk injury.
Adapted to arid regions, Jerusalem-Thorn is one of
the best choices for hot, dry locations and its salttolerance makes it ideal for seaside plantings. The
light shade afforded by the fine-textured foliage allows
lawns to thrive beneath this tree and its small size
allows a multitude of applications, from specimen,
parking lot, median, or street tree, set back from the
road or walk. There are reports of the plant escaping
cultivation in some locations along the gulf coast.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Some pests of Jerusalen Thorn are scales and
thorn bugs, but none are serious.
Diseases
One disease that infects this tree on wet soils is
root rot but none are serious on other sites.
Witches-broom occasionally causes a proliferation
of branches forming tight heads of foliage.