Fact Sheet ST-432
October 1994
Parrotia persica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Persian Parrotia.
Persian Parrotia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This 20 to 40-foot-high deciduous tree forms a
low-branched, rounded silhouette, 20 to 35 feet wide,
and often has multiple trunks, although it can be
trained to a single trunk (Fig. 1). The flowers which
appear before the leaves in spring are somewhat
interesting, showing no petals just a profusion of
relatively inconspicuous deep crimson stamens. Fruits
are not set in abundance and are of little consequence.
But it is the foliage of Persian Parrotia which attracts
the most attention, unfolding as reddish-purple young
leaves, maturing to a lustrous, dark green through the
summer, and then finally putting on a brilliant fall
display of various hues of vivid yellow, burnt orange,
and deep, pure scarlet. Even in winter Persian Parrotia
is a striking landscape element, the much-branched
canopy and multiple trunks finally able to clearly
display their attractive peeling bark and spectacular
form. Trunk and bark character can be displayed yearround by removing lower branches and foliage.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Parrotia persica
Pronunciation: par-ROE-tee-uh PER-sih-kuh
Common name(s): Persian Parrotia
Family: Hamamelidaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; wide tree
lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6
feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; shade tree; narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 40 feet
Spread: 20 to 35 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-432, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Parrotia persica -- Persian Parrotia Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; dentate; serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk;
tree wants to grow with several trunks but can be
trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Parrotia persica -- Persian Parrotia Page 3
Current year twig color: brown
Figure 3. Foliage of Persian Parrotia.
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
These ornamental characteristics and a pest-free
nature make Persian Parrotia ideal for use as a
specimen or street tree. Accent the tree in a landscape
by setting it off by itself in a lawn or in a bed of low
ground cover. Space 20 to 30 feet apart along a street
or walk to create a canopy over the walk. It will not
canopy over the street but will form a wall of
wonderful foliage along the sides of a residential
street. This tree should be grown and planted more.
Persian Parrotia should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained, slightly acid soil and
will adapt to alkaline soil provided other cultural
requirements are met. Trees will not tolerate wet soil
conditions, but should show considerable drought
tolerance once established.
The cultivar ‘Pendula’ reportedly forms a rounded,
weeping silhouette, five to six feet high by 10 feet
wide, but is rare in the trade.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. It is
virtually pest free.