Fact Sheet ST-434
October 1994
Peltophorum pterocarpum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Yellow Poinciana.
Yellow Poinciana1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This upright, handsome, spreading, semievergreen
tree has a rounded canopy and is capable of reaching
50 feet in height with a 35 to 50-foot spread (Fig. 1).
Form can be quite variable from tree to tree,
unfortunately, eliminating this plant from the palette of
many architects. With proper training and pruning in
the nursery and in the landscape, a more uniform
crown will develop. The dark green, delicate, feathery
leaflets provide a softening effect for the tree’s large
size and create a welcoming, dappled shade. From
May through September, the entire tree’s canopy is
smothered with a yellow blanket of flowers, appearing
in showy, terminal panicles and exuding a delicious,
grape-like perfume. These flower clusters are followed
by four-inch-long seed pods which ripen to a brilliant,
dark, wine-red.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Peltophorum pterocarpum
Pronunciation: pell-TOFF-oh-rum teer-oh-KAR-pum
Common name(s): Yellow Poinciana
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; even pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: semievergreen
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-434, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Peltophorum pterocarpum -- Yellow Poinciana Page 2
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: purple; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Peltophorum pterocarpum -- Yellow Poinciana Page 3
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
Figure 3. Foliage of Yellow Poinciana.
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Yellow Poinciana is a wonderful shade or
specimen tree for a large landscape, especially when in
full bloom, and it can make a street tree as long as it
receives regular pruning to control its weedy,
somewhat unkempt habit. Its large size makes it a
natural for the wide open spaces of large lawns or city
parks.
Trees can be grown with a single or multiple
trunk. Trunks or branches of multi-trunked trees
should be well-spaced along a central stem and not
allowed to grow larger than half the diameter of the
main stem. This will increase wind hardiness. Plant
only single-trunked trees along streets and other public
areas to ensure a durable plant.
A fast-growing tree, Yellow Poinciana grows best
in full sun on any well-drained soil. Temperatures in
the high 20’s cause the leaves to drop but these are
quickly replaced. Even though Yellow Poinciana will
develop a very large trunk, its shallow, surface roots
make it susceptible to being blown over during a
hurricane’s severe windstorms. Locate the tree about
ten feet from sidewalks or pavement so the large
surface roots don’t cause damage.
Peltophorum inerme is grown in the southern part
of Florida (USDA hardiness zone 10b) and in the
tropical areas, and is not as hardy. Peltophorum
dubium is cold hardy to Orlando (USDA hardiness
zone 9b).
Propagation is by cuttings or seed. Seeds must be
scarified and seedlings will bloom in four to five
years.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.