Fact Sheet ST-435
October 1994
Persea americana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Avocado.
Avocado1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The large, lustrous dark green evergreen leaves
and low-branching, open canopy of Avocado makes it
a wonderful shade tree but it is most often grown for
the abundant production of its well-known, delicious,
buttery fruits (Fig. 1). Depending on cultivars and
variety, the fruits may vary from smooth-skinned to
rough, and yellow-green to purple. Commonly seen at
35 to 40 feet in height but capable of growing much
larger, Avocado fits well into large residential
landscapes in frost-protected locations. It can be
pruned to an open spreading form or left to grow tall
forming a rather narrow oval. Older trees become
more rounded. The somewhat showy, greenish flowers
appear on terminal panicles in late winter to early
spring and are followed by the large, pendulous, pearshaped fruits, ripening late summer to early spring,
depending upon variety.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Persea americana
Pronunciation: PER-see-uh uh-mair-ih-KAY-nuh
Common name(s): Avocado
Family: Lauraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: fruit tree; shade tree; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-435, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Persea americana -- Avocado Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval (Fig. 3)
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green; purple
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
Persea americana -- Avocado Page 3
weak and tends to break
Figure 3. Fruit of Avocado.
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Avocado trees grow quickly in either full sun or
light shade on any well-drained soil. Trees should be
watered regularly until established and later during
droughts. A forest tree in its native habitat, Avocado
respond well to a thick leaf mulch and periodic
fertilization. Lawn grasses should be kept away from
the trunk. The brittle wood of Avocado trees is
subject to storm damage when trees grow taller than
50 feet in the open.
Some of the many cultivars available for variety of
fruit production and season are: ‘Lula’, ‘Tonnage’,
‘Taylor’, ‘Booth 7’, ‘Booth 8’, ‘Pollack’, ‘Trapp’,
‘Walden’, ‘Linda’, and ‘Itzamna’.
Propagation is by seed or grafting.
Pests
Mites and scale infestations can become quite
serious in local areas.
Diseases
Root rots on poorly-drained soils and leaf-spotting
diseases can be troublesome.