Fact Sheet ST-436
October 1994
Persea borbonia
Figure 1. Mature Redbay.
Redbay1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This handsome North American native evergreen
tree can reach 50 feet in height with a comparable
spread but is often seen somewhat shorter and wider,
particularly when grown in the open in an urban area
(Fig. 1). The glossy, leathery, medium green, six-inch
leaves emit a spicy fragrance when crushed and the
inconspicuous, springtime flower clusters are followed
by small, dark blue fruits which ripen in fall. These
fruits are enjoyed by birds and squirrels and add to the
tree’s overall attractiveness. The trunk bears very
showy, ridged, red-brown bark and frequently branches
low to the ground forming a multi-stemmed habit
similar to live oak, but it can be pruned to make a
single, short central leader which would be most
suitable for many urban plantings.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Persea borbonia
Pronunciation: PER-see-uh bor-BOE-nee-uh
Common name(s): Redbay
Family: Lauraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; near a deck or patio;
reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen; residential
street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 30 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate; oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-436, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Persea borbonia -- Redbay Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Persea borbonia -- Redbay Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Redbay.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Thriving on little care in full sun or partial shade,
Redbay can tolerate a wide range of soils, from hot
and dry to wet and swampy. Redbay is a rugged and
adaptable plant suitable to many landscape
applications. Unfortunately, the wood is reportedly
brittle and subject to wind damage. Pruning to keep
lateral branches less than half the diameter of the trunk
will increase the tree’s longevity and help prevent
branches from separating from the trunk. The denselyfoliated, spreading branches create a lush, billowly,
rounded canopy making Redbay a wonderful shade
tree. It can make a nice street tree planted on 20 to
25-foot centers but be sure to prune it properly as
mentioned above. Plant with caution where cars will
park or near sidewalks since birds love the fruit and
often visit the tree, leaving their droppings on cars.
The fruit can also be messy on cars and walks. Its
ease of growth and neat, dense crown habit also make
Redbay ideal for the low-maintenance and naturalized
landscape. The dark brown, furrowed bark is
particularly attractive on older specimens.
Propagation is by seed which germinate readily
after several months in the ground.
Pests and Diseases
Redbay is occasionally bothered by twig dieback.
This can be caused by a boring insect which bores
inside a small twig causing the leaves on the end of
the twig to turn brown and hang on the tree. This can
be bothersome to a nursery operator, but usually only
causes cosmetic damage to landscape trees. Insectcaused galls can distort and disfigure the leaves but do
not significantly harm the tree. Scale insects
occasionally infest the twigs or leaves, followed by
sooty mold.