Fact Sheet ST-437
October 1994
Phellodendron amurense
Figure 1. Middle-aged Amur Corktree.
Amur Corktree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Growing 30 to 40 feet tall with an equal or much
greater spread, Amur Corktree has a short trunk and an
open, rounded, spreading canopy which makes it ideal
as a durable shade tree (Fig. 1). Male clones can be
used for street and parking lot planting because they
produce no fruit. The deciduous, dark green, pinnately
compound leaflets change to bronze and yellow in the
fall before dropping. The insignificant yellow/green
flowers appear in late May to early June on 2 to 3.5-
inch-long panicles, and are followed by small black
drupes which sometimes persist into winter, if not first
devoured by birds. These black fruits give off a
strong odor when crushed and create a mess on a
sidewalk and some people may find it more desirable
to only plant male trees (‘Macho’) which will not
produce this fruit. The species can naturalize as seeds
readily germinate in the landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Phellodendron amurense
Pronunciation: fell-oh-DEN-drawn am-moor-EN-see
Common name(s): Amur Corktree, Chinese Corktree
Family: Rutaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; specimen; residential street tree; tree has
been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire; undulate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-437, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Phellodendron amurense -- Amur Corktree Page 2
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaflet venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green; white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Phellodendron amurense -- Amur Corktree Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Amur Corktree.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The attractive grey/brown bark is deeply ridged
and furrowed, and on mature trees it takes on a corky
texture. Branches are usually borne low on the trunk,
droop and grow horizontally forming a spreading
habit. The shallow root system needs plenty of room
to expand in order to establish the tree properly.
The fruitless (male) cultivar ‘Macho’ has thick,
leathery leaves and a more pleasing, upright-spreading
growth form. ‘Macho’ should be planted instead of
the species due to its less spreading and less drooping
habit which makes it more suited for street tree
planting. Pruning usually is not required once good
branch structure is established early in the life of the
tree. Allow for adequate soil space for root
development so they do not lift sidewalks and
pavement. ‘Shademaster’ is also fruitless and
available in the trade.
Amur Corktree grows rapidly and prefers to be
grown in full sun on deep, rich soil but will tolerate
any soil, acid or alkaline. It tolerates wet soil and
drought. Once highly recommended as a street and
urban-tolerant tree, it does not appear to hold up to the
rigors of city life under certain conditions, particularly
restricted soil spaces (although the experts appear to
disagree as to the tolerance of this tree to city life - the
tree may be more sensitive to soil conditions than is
commonly realized).
Propagation is by seed, which germinate readily.
Pests and Diseases
This tree is virtually pest-free.