Fact Sheet ST-439
October 1994
Phoenix canariensis
Figure 1. Mature Canary Island Date Palm.
Canary Island Date Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large, stately palm often reaches a size too
massive for most residential landscapes but,
fortunately, it is very slow-growing and will take a
considerable amount of time to reach its 50 to 60-footheight (Fig. 1). Canary Island Date Palm is most
impressive with its single, upright, thick trunk topped
with a crown of 8 to 15-foot-long, stiff leaves with
extremely sharp spines at their bases. The stalks of
inconspicuous flowers are replaced with clusters of
one-inch-diameter, orange-yellow, date-like,
ornamental fruits which ripen in early summer. The
trunk can reach a diameter of four feet and is covered
with an attractive, diamond-shaped pattern from old
leaf scars.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Phoenix canariensis
Pronunciation: FEE-nicks kan-air-ee-EN-sis
Common name(s): Canary Island Date Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-439, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Phoenix canariensis -- Canary Island Date Palm Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: linear
Leaflet venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 12 to 18 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; no significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Phoenix canariensis -- Canary Island Date Palm Page 3
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Canary Island Date Palm should be grown in full
sun on fertile, moist soil for best growth but is tolerant
of any well-drained soil. It can be planted on the
inland side of coastal condominiums and large homes
due to moderately high salt-tolerance. It does well as
a street or avenue tree, even in confined soil spaces.
Canary Island Date Palm will require pruning to
remove old fronds. Older leaves frequently become
chlorotic from magnesium or potassium-deficiency.
Preventive applications of appropriate fertilizer helps
avoid this. Avoid damage to the trunk by locating it
properly in the landscape and keeping landscape
maintenance equipment away. Damaged trees are
susceptible to Ganoderma rot.
Only prune fronds which hang below the
horizontal. Do not remove those growing upright
since this may slow the growth and reduce vigor.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Giant palm weevil can kill recently transplanted
palms or those which are injured. Once in the palm,
remedial control is not possible. Preventing injury is
the best way to avoid the weevil. Some landscape
managers conduct a preventive spray program
following transplanting on these highly valued palms
until they are well-established in the landscape.
Palm leaf skeletonizer devours leaves.
A variety of scale insects infest this palm.
Diseases
Mildly susceptible to lethal yellowing disease and
leaf spot.
Stressed and damaged trees often are infected with
the Ganoderma fungus. A conk is formed at the base
of the tree which appears as a varnished shelf or
mushroom. Remove the conk and the tree to help
control the spread of the disease to other plants.
Prevent injury to the trunk and roots, and plant in
well-drained soil. Be sure sprinklers do not irrigate
the trunk so it remains wet. A wet trunk and wet soil
encourage this disease. There is no control for butt
rot, only prevention.