Fact Sheet ST-440
October 1994
Phoenix reclinata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Senegal Date Palm.
Senegal Date Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This striking palm creates an interesting silhouette
with its multiple, gracefully curved, often reclining,
slender brown trunks, and dense crowns of stiff but
feathery leaf fronds (Fig. 1). Old frond bases are
medium brown and remain on the trunk forming a
showy trunk which is attractive all year long. A
mature specimen of Senegal Date Palm can reach 35
feet in height with a 12 to 20-foot-spread and creates a
striking tree which casts a light shade. The palm is
elegant when lit from below at night. It is best used
as an accent for large landscapes and parks. The
somewhat showy flower stalks, often lost within the
thick foliage, are followed by one-inch-long, bright
orange dates which are incredibly showy. These can
be very attractive, particularly when viewed from a
balcony above the tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Phoenix reclinata
Pronunciation: FEE-nicks reck-lih-NAY-tuh
Common name(s): Senegal Date Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 12 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: linear
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-440, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Phoenix reclinata -- Senegal Date Palm Page 2
Leaflet venation: parallel
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 12 to 18 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Phoenix reclinata -- Senegal Date Palm Page 3
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The multiple trunks lose older fronds as the palm
grows, clearing lower trunks of all foliage. This
characteristic makes Senegal Date Palm a wonderful
tree for accenting in a bed of groundcover or a
grouping of low shrubs. Trunks which bend to the
horizontal as the palm ages may need to be supported
with a brace or cable to hold them up.
Growing easily in full sun or partial shade,
Senegal Date Palm will thrive on any well-drained
soil. Plants should receive adequate moisture during
periods of drought. This palm is too large for all but
the largest residential landscapes. They are very costly
to purchase due to the slow growth rate. Large
specimens command a high price.
Propagation is by seed or division of the many
suckers which appear at the base of old clumps.
Pests
A variety of scales infest this palm.
Diseases
Some diseases of this tree are lethal yellowing
disease, leaf spot.
Stressed and damaged trees often are infected with
the Ganoderma fungus. A conk is formed at the base
of the tree which appears as a varnished shelf or
mushroom. Remove the conk and the tree to help
control the spread of the disease to other plants.
Prevent injury to the trunk and roots, and plant in
well-drained soil. Be sure sprinklers do not irrigate
the trunk so it remains wet. A wet trunk and wet soil
encourage this disease. There is no control for butt
rot, only prevention.