Fact Sheet ST-443
October 1994
Photinia serrulata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Chinese Photinia.
Chinese Photinia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Small, white flowers arranged in dense, showy,
eight-inch-diameter clusters at branch tips and large,
shiny, dark green leaves combine to make Chinese
Photinia an attractive evergreen for multiple landscape
applications (Fig. 1). An under-used landscape tree
with very showy flowers and bright red fruit. Often
kept trimmed into a hedge shape, multitrunked Chinese
Photinia creates an ideal small tree with the proper
training, and when the lower branches are removed,
the natural rounded canopy adds to its attractive
silhouette. New growth is tinged pink, though not as
much as Photinia glabra, and young twigs are red to
reddish-brown. The serrate-margined leaves can reach
eight inches in length and are two inches wide, and
plants may reach 40 feet in height under ideal
conditions but are more often seen at 15 to 20 feet.
The springtime flower clusters are followed by small,
red berry-like fruit clusters which persist through the
winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Photinia serrulata
Pronunciation: foe-TIN-nee-uh ser-yoo-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Chinese Photinia
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; screen; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-443, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Photinia serrulata -- Chinese Photinia Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; summer
flowering; unpleasant fragrance; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Photinia serrulata -- Chinese Photinia Page 3
Breakage: resistant
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Photinia.
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Nurseries could produce trees with a single leader
and market them as street trees. They stay fairly
small, grow fast when young but slow down later as
the crown broadens. Great for planting beneath
powerlines. Prune to distribute main branches along a
central trunk to increase longevity.
Chinese Photinia needs well-drained soil and a full
sun location. Leaves often become infected with leaf
spot fungi when grown in shade or when the leaves
remain too moist. Plants grow at a moderate rate and
tolerate pruning very well, although the bottom of the
plant often thins when clipped into a hedge. There are
much better plants for hedges, although Photinia
makes a good tall screen plant. Well-adapted to sand
or clay (well-drained), acid or alkaline soil, Photinia
likes to be kept on the dry side and is very droughttolerant. It is popular in all of USDA hardiness zones
7 and 8 as a highway median plant and could be used
more as a multi-stemmed specimen, street or patio
tree.
The cultivar ‘Aculeata’ has reddish young stems,
more serrate leaves than the species, and reaches about
10 feet in height. ‘Nova’ reaches 10 feet in height
with a seven to eight-foot spread. There is a hybrid
between red-leaved Photinia (Photinia glabra) and
Chinese Photinia (Photinia serrulata) which perhaps
displays the best characteristics of both parents, called
Photinia x fraseri. It is very popular in the nursery
trade and is often used as a hedge or foundation plant,
a usage which is quite inappropriate due to its large
size and rapid growth rate.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
It is usually pest-free but caterpillars, mites, scales,
and European fruit-tip moth are sometimes a problem.
Diseases
Chinese Photinia is usually disease-free, except for
leaf spot which can be devastating. Fire blight, and
mildew in shady locations can also be troublesome.