Fact Sheet ST-447
October 1994
Photinia x fraseri
Figure 1. Middle-aged Fraser Photinia.
Fraser Photinia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Growing 12 to 18 feet high by 8 to 12 feet wide,
Fraser Photinia forms an upright silhouette of glossy,
evergreen leaves (Fig. 1). One of the most striking
features of Fraser Photinia is the burgundy-red new
foliage which contrasts nicely against the dark green
mature foliage. Most people do not see the showy
white flower clusters borne at the ends of the branches
in the summer because they regularly prune the new
growth. It is really quite attractive in flower, as the
entire crown fills with white for two or three weeks.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Photinia x fraseri
Pronunciation: foe-TIN-nee-uh x FRAY-zer-eye
Common name(s): Fraser Photinia
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; screen; trainable as a standard; sidewalk
cutout (tree pit); tree has been successfully grown in
urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 18 feet
Spread: 8 to 12 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-447, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Photinia x fraseri -- Fraser Photinia Page 2
Crown shape: oval; upright
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green; purple or red
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Photinia x fraseri -- Fraser Photinia Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Fraser Photinia.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Ideal for use as a clipped hedge or screen (if you
don’t mind the bottom of it being on the thin side),
Fraser Photinia produces some attractive new red
growth all throughout the growing season in USDA
hardiness zones 8 and 9. Unfortunately, everyone
seems to have discovered the plant and everyone has
one (or many) but most people use it as a hedge. Try
it as a tree for something different. It is best used as a
tall screen in the full sun but is often misused as a
foundation plant in front of the house. It grows fine in
the shade but leaf spot is sure to follow causing
defoliation and disappointment (or jubilation
depending upon your persuasion).
Fraser Photinia needs well-drained soil and a full
sun location. Leaves often become infected with leaf
spot fungi when grown in shade or when the leaves
remain too moist. Plants grow at a moderate rate and
tolerate pruning very well, although the bottom of the
plant often thins when clipped into a hedge. There are
better plants for hedges. Micro-nutrient problems
occur on alkaline soil, although plants continue to
grow. It tolerates heat well and is suited for exposed
sites like parking lots and median strips in highways.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
Caterpillars, mites, scales, European fruit-tip moth
can be found on photinia but are often of little
consequence.
Disease
Fire blight kills the plant rather quickly, leafspot
diseases are very serious, and mildew. Root rot can
kill plants, particularly those in wet soils. This is not
a pest-free plant.