Fact Sheet ST-451
October 1994
Picea omorika
Figure 1. Mature Serbian Spruce.
Serbian Spruce1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A narrow, pyramidal silhouette with thin, graceful
arching branches (Fig. 1). The trunk grows straight
and the tree requires no pruning to keep the narrow,
pyramidal form. The upper surface of the needles is
glossy, dark green. The lower surface is marked with
two white stomata lines. The plant will grow about 50
feet tall and spread 20 feet and is one of the most
elegant Spruces.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Picea omorika
Pronunciation: PIE-see-uh oh-more-EE-kuh
Common name(s): Serbian Spruce
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; screen; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 45 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-451, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Picea omorika -- Serbian Spruce Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Picea omorika -- Serbian Spruce Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Serbian Spruce.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree is best used as a specimen, wind break,
screen, or perhaps as an evergreen street tree for
narrow overhead spaces. It is surprisingly tolerant of
urban conditions, probably more so than other Spruces.
Grows best with some shelter from mid-day or
afternoon sun, though it tolerates full-day sun. Also
tolerates soils with a high pH.
Pests
Bagworms make a sack by webbing needles and
debris together. Small numbers may be picked off by
hand or use Bacillus thuringiensis. Usually not
serious.
In northern areas, Spruce budworm larvae feed on
developing buds and young needles. The yellowish
brown caterpillars are difficult to see.
The Spruce needle miner makes a small hole in
the base of a needle then mines out the center. Dead
needles are webbed together and can be found on
infested twigs.
Spider mites can be problem in summer after hot
dry weather. The small insects can’t be readily seen
with the naked eye. The first noticeable symptoms are
yellowing of the oldest needles on infested branches.
Close inspection with a magnifying glass will confirm
the presence of the mites.
Sawfly larvae may feed on the needles. One
infestation will usually not kill the tree.
Diseases
Spruce may be attacked by needle casts causing
needles to turn yellow or brown and drop off.
Another needle cast affects the lowest needles first
then moves up the tree. Infected needles are a mottled
yellow.
Several rust diseases attack Spruce but these are
rarely seen. Infected needles turn yellow and drop off.