Fact Sheet ST-450
October 1994
Picea glauca
Figure 1. Young White Spruce.
White Spruce1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This North American native tree has a fairly
broad, pyramidal silhouette when young but matures
into a dense, 40 to 60-foot-tall column, 10 to 20 feet
high (Fig. 1). The short, silver-green needles densely
clothe the upright branches making White Spruce
ideally suited to use as a hedge or windbreak. Small,
1 to 2.5-inch-long, light brown, pendulous cones
decorate the branches throughout the year. The new
layers of purplish/grey bark have a soft, silvery sheen
which add to the tree’s attractiveness as a specimen
planting.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Picea glauca
Pronunciation: PIE-see-uh GLAW-kuh
Common name(s): White Spruce
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2 through 6 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: screen; specimen; Christmas tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-450, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Picea glauca -- White Spruce Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; terminal spine
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.40
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Picea glauca -- White Spruce Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of White Spruce.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Most often found on stream banks and lake shores,
White Spruce should be grown in the landscape on
moist or dry soils in full sun or partial shade. Trees
which are well-established are quite tolerant of wind,
heat, cold, and drought but can also tolerate wet soil
for a period of time.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
The cultivar ‘Conica’ is a 10 to 15-foot-high dwarf
form with soft, blue/green needles and is ideal for
container use, particularly at Christmastime.
Pests
Mites, aphids and bagworms are the most common
pests.
Two gall commonly attack Spruce. Eastern
Spruce gall adelgid forms pineapple like galls at the
base of twigs. Galls caused by Cooley’s Spruce gall
adelgid look like miniature cones at the branch tips.
The gall adelgids do not kill trees unless the
infestation is heavy. A few galls on a large tree are
not serious.
Bagworms make a sack by webbing needles
together. Small numbers may be picked off by hand
or use Bacillus thuringiensis.
Spruce budworm larvae feed on developing buds
and young needles. The yellowish brown caterpillars
are difficult to see.
The Spruce needle miner makes a small hole in
the base of a needle then mines out the center. Dead
needles are webbed together and can be found on
infested twigs.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
feeding on the needles only. Populations would have
to be quite high to cause major damage.
Spider mites can be problem in summer after hot
dry weather. The small insects can’t be readily seen
with the naked eye. The first noticeable symptoms are
yellowing of the oldest needles on infested branches.
Close inspection with a magnifying glass will confirm
the presence of the mites.
Sawfly larvae may feed on the needles. One
infestation will usually not kill the tree.
Diseases
Several rust diseases attack Spruce but these are
rarely seen. Infected needles turn yellow and drop off.