Fact Sheet ST-453
October 1994
Picea pungens
Figure 1. Middle-aged Colorado Spruce.
Colorado Spruce1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Colorado Spruce has a horizontal branching habit
and grows taller than 75 feet in its native habitat, but
is normally seen at 30 to 50 feet in landscapes (Fig.
1). The tree grows about twelve inches per year once
established but may grow slower for several years
following transplanting. Needles emerge as a soft
clump, changing to a stiff, pointed needle sharp to the
touch. The crown form varies from columnar to
pyramidal, ranging from 10 to 20 feet in diameter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Picea pungens
Pronunciation: PIE-see-uh PUN-jenz
Common name(s): Colorado Spruce, Colorado Blue
Spruce, Blue Spruce
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: screen; specimen; Christmas tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 10 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; terminal spine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-453, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Picea pungens -- Colorado Spruce Page 2
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green; orange; purple
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Picea pungens -- Colorado Spruce Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Colorado Spruce.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Colorado Spruce casts dense shade when branched
to the ground, so no grass grows beneath it. Colorado
Blue Spruce lends a formal effect to any landscape due
to the stiff, horizontal branches, and blue foliage. It is
often used as a specimen or as a screen planted 10 to
15 feet apart.
The tree prefers a rich, moist soil, and benefits
from irrigation in dry weather. It is not for Dallas and
south in Texas, but Lubbock and north into Oklahoma
is suitable. Trees benefit from a layer of mulch
extending beyond the edge of the branches. This
keeps roots cool and reduces moisture loss from the
soil. It grows in full sun or the shade on the north
side of a building. It tolerates clay.
Susceptibility to canker makes this tree a
questionable choice for large-scale planting in the
eastern states. Substitute White Fir (Abies concolor)
for the same blue foliage effect without the disease
problem. Also, the wax coating on the needles which
gives the blue color can be washed off by some
pesticides. Check the label and test the spray on a
small scale before spraying.
A number of cultivars are listed. The most
common cultivar is ‘Glauca’, the Blue Colorado
Spruce. The blue trees are sometimes grown from
seeds, so they vary in degree of blue coloration. For
reliable blue color, purchase a grafted, named cultivar
selected for its blue color. The list of cultivars is not
long: ‘Argentea’ (silver Colorado Spruce) - silvery
foliage color; ‘Glauca’ (blue Colorado Spruce) - bluish
foliage; ‘Glauca Procumbens’ - bluish foliage, height
about two feet but spread several times the height;
‘Globosa’ - three feet tall, blue foliage; ‘Hoopsii’ -
bluish foliage; ‘Iseli Foxtail’ is a new Southern
introduction and could be the most heat-adapted Blue
Spruce--further testing will tell; ‘Moerhiemii’
(Moerhiem Spruce) - compact, dense and very blue;
‘Pendens’ (Koster’s Blue Spruce) - weeping habit,
must be staked to get it to take tree form, blue foliage;
‘Thompsoni’ - bluish foliage.
Pests
Two gall-forming insects commonly attack Spruce.
Eastern Spruce gall adelgid forms pineapple like galls
at the base of twigs. Galls caused by Cooley’s Spruce
gall adelgid look like miniature cones at the branch
tips. The gall adelgids do not kill trees unless the
infestation is heavy. A few galls on a large tree are
not serious.
In northern areas, Spruce budworm larvae feed on
developing buds and young needles. The yellowish
brown caterpillars are difficult to see.
The Spruce needle miner makes a small hole in
the base of a needle then mines out the center. Dead
needles are webbed together and can be found on
infested twigs.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
feeding on the needles only. Populations would have
to be quite high to cause major damage.
Aphids can cause needle defoliation.
Mites can be a serious problem in summer after
hot dry weather. The small insects can’t be readily
seen with the naked eye. The first noticeable
symptoms are yellowing of the oldest needles on
infested branches. Close inspection with a magnifying
glass will confirm the presence of the mites.
Diseases
Cytospora canker infects a branch then eventually
kills it. The lower branches are attacked first then
progressively higher branches. The needles turn
brown to reddish brown and eventually drop off.
White resin patches are seen on infected branches.
Prune off infected branches. Water Spruces during dry
weather but keep the foliage as dry as possible.
Picea pungens -- Colorado Spruce Page 4
Spruce may be attacked by needle casts. One
causes needles to turn yellow or brown and drop off.
Another needle cast affects the lowest needles first
then moves up the tree. Infected needles are a mottled
yellow.
Several rust diseases attack Spruce but these are
rarely seen. Infected needles turn yellow and drop off.