Fact Sheet ST-452
October 1994
Picea orientalis
Figure 1. Young Oriental Spruce.
Oriental Spruce1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Soaring to 120 feet in its native habitat, Oriental
Spruce is more often seen at 25 to 40 feet in the
landscape, growing slowly into a dense pyramidal
silhouette which casts dense shade beneath (Fig. 1).
There are some specimens in landscapes 50 or 60 feet
tall but these are rare. The horizontal branches bend
downward slightly at the tips, and are generously
clothed with short, dark green needles. Both male and
female flowers are considered insignificant although
the male flowers resemble small red strawberries. The
flowers are followed by the production of two to fourinch-long and one-inch-wide, reddish-purple cones
which mature to a shiny brown. Unfortunately the tree
is rare in the industry.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Picea orientalis
Pronunciation: PIE-see-uh or-ee-en-TAY-liss
Common name(s): Oriental Spruce
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; screen; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-452, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Picea orientalis -- Oriental Spruce Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Picea orientalis -- Oriental Spruce Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Oriental Spruce.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Best used as a specimen in protected landscapes,
Oriental Spruce lends a graceful addition to any yard.
Leave plenty of room for lateral branch growth near
the base of the tree as it looks odd when lower
branches are removed. Watch for mite infestations
during hot weather.
Oriental Spruce should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained soil, and will tolerate
infertile, even rocky soils. However, Oriental Spruce
should only be used where winters are not extremely
dry, and the plants should be located where they will
not be exposed to harsh winter winds or air pollution.
Excessively dry, windy, winter weather can brown the
foliage. Generous irrigation in the fall will help the
tree pull through the winter.
Cultivars include: ‘Aurea’, new growth is yellow,
gradually changes to green; ‘Gowdy’, narrow columnar
form, small green leaves; ‘Gracilis’, small conical
form, 15 to 20 feet tall, bright green needles; ‘Pendula’
(‘Weeping Dwarf’), compact, pyramidal weeping form.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Mites, aphids and bagworms are the most common
pests.
Two gall commonly attack Spruce. Eastern
Spruce gall adelgid forms pineapple like galls at the
base of twigs. Galls caused by Cooley’s Spruce gall
adelgid look like miniature cones at the branch tips.
The gall adelgids do not kill trees unless the
infestation is heavy. A few galls on a large tree are
not serious.
Bagworms make a sack by webbing needles
together. Small numbers may be picked off by hand
or use Bacillus thuringiensis.
Spruce budworm larvae feed on developing buds
and young needles. The yellowish brown caterpillars
are difficult to see.
The Spruce needle miner makes a small hole in
the base of a needle then mines out the center. Dead
needles are webbed together and can be found on
infested twigs.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
feeding on the needles only. Populations would have
to be quite high to cause major damage.
Spider mites can be problem in summer after hot
dry weather. The small insects can’t be readily seen
with the naked eye. The first noticeable symptoms are
yellowing of the oldest needles on infested branches.
Close inspection with a magnifying glass will confirm
the presence of the mites.
Picea orientalis -- Oriental Spruce Page 4
Sawfly larvae may feed on the needles. One
infestation will usually not kill the tree.
Diseases
Spruce may be attacked by needle casts. One,
caused by Lophodermium piceae, causes needles to
turn yellow or brown and drop off. Another, caused
by Rhizosphaera kalkhoffi, affects the lowest needles
first then moves up the tree. Infected needles are a
mottled yellow.
Several rust diseases attack Spruce but these are
rarely seen. Infected needles turn yellow and drop off.