Fact Sheet ST-448
October 1994
Picea abies
Figure 1. Mature Norway Spruce.
Norway Spruce1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Norway Spruce can grow 80 to 100 feet tall and
spread 25 to 40 feet, though some listed cultivars are
shrublike (Fig. 1). Small-diameter branches sweep
horizontally from the straight trunk which can grow to
four feet thick. Branchlets droop from the branches
toward the ground in a graceful, weeping fashion
forming a delicate pyramid. On very old specimens
the lower branches increase to 12" or more in diameter
and the top becomes open. Many small-diameter roots
originate from the base of the trunk and they are often
found fairly close to the surface of the soil. The root
system is shallow and often dense, particularly close to
the trunk which makes growing grass difficult.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Picea abies
Pronunciation: PIE-see-uh AY-beez
Common name(s): Norway Spruce
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2B through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 80 to 100 feet
Spread: 25 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-448, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Picea abies -- Norway Spruce Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Picea abies -- Norway Spruce Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Norway Spruce.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Norway Spruce is best used as a specimen in a
lawn area or as a wind break or screen, planted on 20-
foot-centers. Rockefeller Center in New York City
erects a Norway Spruce each Christmas next to the
skating rink and decorates it for the holiday season.
Norway Spruce tolerates most soils if moist and
transplants easily if balled and burlapped or potted.
Trees subjected to drought are much happier if they
receive periodic irrigation although they tolerate
drought well.
There are a number of cultivars of Norway Spruce.
Some are dwarf and shrublike, while others are trees.
Not all will be available in nurseries. Cultivars
include: ‘Clanbrasiliana’ - dwarf, about four feet tall
and twice as wide; ‘Columnaris’ - narrow, columnar;
‘Echiniformis’ (Hedgehog Spruce) - a rounded dwarf,
broad; ‘Gregoryana’ - rounded, broad, about three feet
tall but much wider, slow-growing; ‘Humulis’ - about
two feet tall; ‘Inversa’ - 40 to 50 feet tall, drooping
habit; ‘Maxwelli’ - four feet tall and 10 feet wide,
slow-growing, dense; ‘Nidiformis’ - dwarf, very dense
mound; ‘Nigra’ - densely branched, dark green;
‘Pendula’ - weeping; ‘Procumbens’ - flat, dense, can
be three feet tall; ‘Pumila’ - spreading, about four feet
tall; ‘Pygmea’ - conical, slow-growing; ‘Pyramidata’ -
narrow, slender pyramid; ‘Reflexa’ - branchlets
pendulous, one foot high but 10 feet wide; ‘Repens’ -
flat and prostrate, less than three feet tall but quite
wide; ‘Stricta’ - slender, spirelike, 40 to 50 feet tall,
eight feet wide.
Pests
Mites are the worst problem, and in hot weather
they can build to populations which require control.
They can be a major problem in summer after hot dry
weather, especially near concrete, buildings, and other
urban surfaces which reflect heat. The small insects
can’t be readily seen with the naked eye. The first
noticeable symptoms are yellowing at the base of the
oldest needles on infested branches. Close inspection
with a magnifying glass will confirm the presence of
the mites.
Two gall-forming insects commonly attack Spruce.
Eastern Spruce gall adelgid forms pineapple like galls
at the base of twigs. Galls caused by Cooley’s Spruce
gall adelgid look like miniature cones at the branch
tips. The gall adelgids do not kill trees unless the
infestation is heavy. A few galls on a large tree are
not serious.
Bagworms make a sack by webbing needles and
debris together. Small numbers may be picked off by
hand or use Bacillus thuringiensis.
In northern climates, Spruce budworm larvae feed
on developing buds and young needles. The yellowish
brown caterpillars are difficult to see.
The Spruce needle miner makes a small hole in
the base of a needle then mines out the center. Dead
needles are webbed together and can be found on
infested twigs. Hand pick these from the tree to
reduce future damage.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
feeding on the needles only. Populations would have
to be quite high to cause major damage.
Sawfly larvae may feed on the needles. One
infestation will usually not kill the tree, but there may
be two or more generations per year.
Picea abies -- Norway Spruce Page 4
Borers can infest trees which are weakened by
other problems.
Diseases
Cytospora canker infects a branch then eventually
kills it. The lower branches are attacked first then
progressively higher branches. The needles turn
brown to reddish brown and eventually drop off.
White resin patches are seen on infected branches.
Prune off infected branches. Water Spruces during dry
weather.
Spruce may be attacked by needle casts. One
causes needles to turn yellow or brown and drop off.
Another affects the lowest needles first then moves up
the tree. Infected needles are a mottled yellow.
Several rust diseases attack Spruce but these are
rarely seen. Infected needles turn yellow and drop off.