Fact Sheet ST-455
October 1994
Pinckneya pubens
Figure 1. Young Pinckneya.
Pinckneya1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
In earlier days, malaria and other fevers were
treated at home with a medicine made from the inner
bark of this deciduous, 30-foot-tall, North American
native tree, giving it the common name "Fevertree"
(Fig. 1). The tree is also referred to as Pinckneya
bractea.The tree is more commonly seen at 15 to 20
feet tall by 15 feet wide as an open-grown landscape
tree. The large, dark green leaves, five to eight inches
long and three to four inches wide, have a lighter
underside and are covered with a light fuzz when
young. The clusters of yellowish-green, 2.5-inch-long
tubular flowers are made more conspicuous by the
cream to bright rose-colored, petal-like sepals, making
Fevertree quite spectacular when it is in full bloom in
early summer. The brown, spotted, round seed
capsules which follow stay on the trees throughout the
winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinckneya pubens
Pronunciation: PINK-nee-uh PEW-benz
Common name(s): Pinckneya, Fevertree
Family: Rubiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; near a deck
or patio; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 12 to 18 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-455, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinckneya pubens -- Pinckneya Page 2
Crown density: open
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; yellow
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Pinckneya pubens -- Pinckneya Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Pinckneya.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The unusual, open, coarse habit of growth and
showy flowers make this a conversation piece in any
yard. Use it as an accent in a sunny shrub border or
as a specimen near the patio or deck. This is certainly
a tree to consider when planning a yard due to the
small size and pest resistance.
Found in its native habitat on poorly drained land
or along swamp-margins, Fevertree should only be
planted on moist soils or those areas which are flooded
with rains periodically throughout the year. Although
best flowering appears to be in full sun, trees grown in
partial shade will grow but flower poorly. Not for a
landscape unless it is occasionally irrigated during dry
summers.
Propagation is by seed or division of the many
root-suckers.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.