Fact Sheet ST-462
October 1994
Pinus eldarica
Figure 1. Young Mondell Pine.
Mondell Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Growing rapidly when young, Mondell Pine
reaches heights of 30 to 40 feet and is quite dense
(Fig. 1). This tree stands out among the pines due to
the upright growth habit that stays with the tree
throughout its life. The paired, medium green needles
are five to 6.5 inches long and joined by three-inchlong cones. The tree is most often grown in parts of
Texas.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus eldarica
Pronunciation: PIE-nus ell-DAR-ick-uh
Common name(s): Mondell Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; reclamation plant; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-462, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus eldarica -- Mondell Pine Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Pinus eldarica -- Mondell Pine Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The dense habit would make it well suited as a
fine-textured screen. It is often used as a specimen,
planted in groups or by itself in an open lawn area.
Mondell Pine should be grown in full sun on any
well-drained soil and thrives in desert-like conditions.
It also grows well in alkaline or clay soil.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
Pine tip moth can cause some damage to twigs.