Fact Sheet ST-457
October 1994
Pinus cembroides
Figure 1. Young Mexican Pinyon.
Mexican Pinyon1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native North American tree, Mexican Pinyon is
usually found 20 to 30 feet tall with a spread of 15 to
20 feet, although it may sometimes be larger (Fig. 1).
It forms a compact, conical silhouette, producing a
rounded canopy with age, and the lower branches are
maintained on the tree, providing dense cover to the
ground unless shaded-out by other growth. The stiff,
blue/green needles are 1 to 1.5 inches long and the
small, one to two-inch, yellow or red/brown cones
mature and drop in autumn. The seeds found within
the cones are quite popular with many birds and
mammals - including man. Eaten either raw or
toasted, Pinyon Pine nuts have a wonderful flavor.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus cembroides
Pronunciation: PIE-nus sem-BROY-deez
Common name(s): Mexican Pinyon, Pinyon Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; reclamation plant; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-457, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus cembroides -- Mexican Pinyon Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; suited for human consumption;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Pinus cembroides -- Mexican Pinyon Page 3
Current year twig color: gray
Figure 3. Foliage of Mexican Pinyon.
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Mexican Pinyon should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil, tolerating dry, poor, alkaline soils
but not wet soils. It is probably best not to irrigate
this tree much after it is established in the landscape.
Pests
One pest of Mexican Pinyon is the Pine tip moth.
Although it will kill some new growth, the result is
simply to make the tree more compact since it has a
pruning effect.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.