Fact Sheet ST-477
October 1994
Pinus sylvestris
Figure 1. Middle-aged Scotch Pine.
Scotch Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
In recent years the tree has been bothered with
fatal attacks of Pine wilt nematode, therefore, its use in
landscapes is not recommended in many areas (Fig. 1).
A widely planted evergreen in the past that will grow
40 to 50 feet tall and 30 feet wide, Scotch Pine has
bluish-green to green foliage which usually turns
yellowish green in winter. Orange bark on the trunk
and major limbs peels in papery flakes, and is visible
through the canopy. The plant will tolerate dry soil
and exposed sites forming an open, picturesque,
asymmetrical canopy.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus sylvestris
Pronunciation: PIE-nus sill-VESS-triss
Common name(s): Scotch Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; reclamation plant; Christmas tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-477, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus sylvestris -- Scotch Pine Page 2
Leaf venation: parallel
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Pinus sylvestris -- Scotch Pine Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Scotch Pine.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It is a good tree for reclamation sites, is tough and
durable, and is very popular as a Christmas tree. It is
often sprayed with green dye to give it a desirable
green color for the holiday season. It is somewhat
tolerant of basic soil pH, below 7.5.
Propagation is from seed which germinate readily.
Pests
Pine wilt nematode may be the most significant
pest at this time.
Bark beetles bore into trunks making small holes
scattered up and down the trunk. The holes look like
shotholes. Stressed trees are more susceptible to
attack. Keep trees healthy.
Sawfly larvae caterpillars are variously colored but
generally feed in groups on the needles. Some sawfly
larvae will flex or rear back in unison when disturbed.
Sawflies can cause rapid defoliation of branches if left
unchecked.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
on the needles. Pine tortoise scale is brown and found
on twigs. Depending on the scale, horticultural oil
may control overwintering stages.
Zimmerman Pine moth larvae bore into the trunk.
The only outward symptoms may be death of parts of
the tree or masses of hardened pitch on the branches.
The larvae of Pine weevils feed on the sapwood of
the leaders. The leader is killed and the shoots
replacing it are distorted. First symptoms are pearl
white drops of resin on the leaders. The leaders die
when the shoot is girdled as adults emerge in August.
Prune out and burn infested terminals before July 15.
Pine shoot beetle is the latest recognized problem
beginning to plague this tree.
Diseases
Canker diseases may rarely cause dieback of
landscape Pines. Keep trees healthy and prune out the
infected branches.
Needle cast is common on small trees and
plantation or forest trees. Infected needles yellow and
fall off.
Scots Pine is very susceptible to pine wilt
nematode.