Fact Sheet ST-469
October 1994
Pinus palustris
Figure 1. Young Longleaf Pine.
Longleaf Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This beautiful, native North American pine tree is
capable of reaching 80 to 125 feet in height with a 30
to 40-foot-spread but is more often seen smaller (Fig.
1). It is usually saved on a construction site for use as
a specimen in the landscape or for providing dappled
shade. Be sure to protect the area beneath the dripline
from heavy equipment during construction. Longleaf
Pine stays in its tufted, grass-like stage for five to
seven years after germinating, growing very slowly
while it develops a root system, then takes off at a
moderate rate. The bright green, evergreen needles are
up to 14 inches long and very flexible, giving an
almost weeping effect to the tree. A distinctive
characteristic of Longleaf Pine is the new growth
clusters, or buds, which are silvery white during the
winter. The inconspicuous spring flowers are followed
by a large, spiny cone, 6 to 10 inches long, which
persist on the tree for a couple of years.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus palustris
Pronunciation: PIE-nus pal-US-triss
Common name(s): Longleaf Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-469, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus palustris -- Longleaf Pine Page 2
Crown shape: oval
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 12 to 18 inches; 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout
Wood specific gravity: 0.59
Pinus palustris -- Longleaf Pine Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Longleaf Pine.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Longleaf Pine is not usually planted in landscapes,
but could be used due to its beautiful bark and nice,
open habit. It would be suited for planting in large
landscapes, such as golf courses and parks, and in
other areas with plenty of overhead space. It would
probably adapt to the hot conditions created near
concrete and asphalt, but dropping needles often
discourage people from planting pines near streets or
other pavement. This may be a small price to pay for
having this tree in the landscape. If people would start
planting this tree, it might catch on as Slash Pine has
in parts of the South.
Longleaf Pine should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained, acidic soil. Once
established, trees are very drought-tolerant and require
no irrigation for survival.
Propagation is by seed. Seedling trees in the wild
usually transplant poorly due to a long tap root.
Pests
Some of its pests are borers, sawflies, pine-shoot
moth, and pine weevils. Pine bark beetles will
occasionally attack old trees which are stressed.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern. This plant is
resistant to fusiform rust.