Fact Sheet ST-459
October 1994
Pinus densiflora
Figure 1. Young Japanese Red Pine.
Japanese Red Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Red Pine reaches a height and spread of
30 to 50 feet in the landscape growing much taller in
the woods (Fig. 1). Needles are arranged in pairs and
remain on the tree for about three years. A
distinguishing feature of this tree is the often crooked
or sweeping trunk which shows reddish-orange peeling
bark. Because lower branches are held nearly
horizontal on the trunk forming a picturesque
silhouette in the landscape it is used best as a
specimen, not as a mass planting. Needles may turn
yellowish during winter on some soils.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus densiflora
Pronunciation: PIE-nus den-sih-FLOR-uh
Common name(s): Japanese Red Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 30 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-459, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus densiflora -- Japanese Red Pine Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval (Fig. 3)
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to grow
with several trunks but can be trained to grow with a
single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pinus densiflora -- Japanese Red Pine Page 3
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
Figure 3. Fruit of Japanese Red Pine.
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree prefers a site with full sun and a
well-drained, slightly acid soil. Clay soil is usually
not suitable unless it is very well drained.
There a few cultivars: ‘Alboterminata’ - yellowish
needle tips; ‘Aurea’ - yellow needles; ‘Oculis-draconis’
- Dragon’s Eye Pine - two yellow lines on needles;
‘Umbraculifera’ - Tanyosho Pine - 20 feet tall, multitrunked.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
This tree is usually pest-free, with occasional
scale, but the list of potential problems is long.
Diseases
Some of its diseases are needle blight and rusts.
Canker diseases may cause dieback of landscape Pines.
Keep trees healthy and prune out the infected
branches.
Needle cast is common on small trees and
plantation or forest trees. Infected needles yellow and
fall off.