Fact Sheet ST-473
October 1994
Pinus strobus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Eastern White Pine.
Eastern White Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Eastern White Pine has soft blue-green needles
borne in groups of five although foliage color varies
greatly from one tree to the next (Fig. 1). It is the
state tree of Maine and Missouri. Some specimens
keep the bluish color throughout the winter, others
loose it. Although it can grow 100 to 120 feet tall
with a three to five-foot-diameter trunk and spread 50
to 60 feet, it is typically seen from 50 to 80 feet tall in
landscapes. Growth is very rapid at first but slows
down with age. Several branches on young trees
normally originate from the same point on the trunk
forming a tree appearing to be built of layers of
foliage. Although young trees are pyramidal and
usually grow with one central leader, the layers (or
whorls) of horizontal branches give White Pine a
distinctive appearance in middle and old age. The
gray bark on the trunk and large branches remains
unusually smooth through middle age, breaking up into
elongated blocks in old age. Be sure to purchase only
certified rust-resistant plants.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus strobus
Pronunciation: PIE-nus STROE-bus
Common name(s): Eastern White Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; screen; shade tree; specimen;
Christmas tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 80 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-473, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus strobus -- Eastern White Pine Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.35
Pinus strobus -- Eastern White Pine Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Eastern White Pine.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The lower branches are retained making White
Pine an excellent candidate for specimen use, although
group plantings with trees spaced 15 to 25 feet apart
add a soft accent to any landscape. Planted 8 to 15
feet apart they are one of only a few Pines which
makes a nice hedge or screen of soft foliage. They are
also used as a Christmas tree. Pinch or clip the
candles as the needles begin to emerge.
Root systems are usually shallow and highly
branched with many fine roots close to the surface of
the soil. Trees transplant well balled and burlapped or
from containers. The wood is soft and is popular as a
lumber tree in the northern part of the country.
Young White Pines are quite tolerant of half-day
shade while mature White Pines prefer a sunny
location and tolerate loamy, moist, well-drained soils.
They do not grow well and often die on clay or on soil
with a pH above 7. Trees appear to have little
tolerance for drought, soil compaction and heat and
should be used only in the cooler climates. Eastern
White Pine is susceptible to salt injury from roads or
drain fields and is sensitive to air pollution
(particularly ozone and sulfur dioxide).
There are a few cultivars: ‘Fastigiata’ - nearly
columnar habit; ‘Glauca’ - foliage bluish; ‘Nana’ - a
dwarf, compact with short needles; ‘Pendula’ -
weeping, eight feet tall; ‘Prostrata’ - absolutely
prostrate.
Propagation is from seed.
Pests
White Pine weevil is probably the biggest
problem. The larvae of White Pine weevils feed on
the sapwood of the leaders and this is devastating to
the tree. The leader is killed and the many shoots
replacing it form a bushy head. First symptoms are
pearl white drops of resin on the leaders. The leaders
die when the shoot is girdled as adults emerge in
summer.
Some adelgids will appear as white cottony
growths on the bark. All types produce honeydew
which may support sooty mold. European Pine shoot
moth causes young shoots to fall over. Infested shoots
may exude resin. The insects can be found in the
shoots during spring.
Bark beetles bore into trunks making small holes
scattered up and down the trunk. Stressed trees are
more susceptible to attack. The holes look like
shotholes. Keep trees healthy.
Sawfly larvae caterpillars are variously colored but
generally feed in groups on the needles. Some sawfly
larvae will flex or rear back in unison when disturbed.
Sawflies can cause rapid defoliation of branches if left
unchecked.
Pinus strobus -- Eastern White Pine Page 4
Pine needle miner larvae feed inside needles
causing them to turn yellow and dry up.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
on the needles. Pine tortoise scale is brown and found
on twigs. Depending on the scale, horticultural oil
may control overwintering stages.
Pine spittle bug lives and hides in a foamy mass.
Spruce mites cause damage to older needles, and
are usually active in the spring and fall. Mites cause
older needles to become yellowed or stippled.
Zimmerman Pine moth larvae bore into the trunk.
The only outward symptoms may be death of parts of
the tree or masses of hardened pitch on the branches.
Diseases
Procerva root rot kills many White Pines planted
off site. Avoid planting in dry sites and clay or
alkaline soil.
White Pine blister rust attacks White Pine and uses
currant as an alternate host. European Black Currant,
the favored alternate host, may be banned from certain
areas. Other Currants, particularly Red Currant should
not be grown within 300 feet of Pines. Infected
branches may be pruned off. Be sure to select White
Pine trees certified to be rust-resistant.
Canker diseases may rarely cause dieback of
landscape Pines. Keep trees healthy and prune out the
infected branches.
Needle cast is common on small trees and
plantation or forest trees. Infected needles yellow and
fall off.
White Pine decline is used to describe the slow
decline of trees planted in dry, clay soils low in
organic matter. Plants with this disorder have only a
small cluster of needles at the ends of the branches.