Fact Sheet ST-458
October 1994
Pinus clausa
Figure 1. Mature Sand Pine.
Sand Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American pine is usually seen as
a scrubby tree, capable of reaching 100 feet in height
but more often seen 15 to 40 feet tall, with a slow
growth rate (Fig. 1). The supple, evergreen leaves and
the plant’s ability to thrive in almost any soil make
Sand Pine a good choice for use as a Christmas tree,
with proper shearing. The 2 to 3.5-inch-long, spiny
cones persist for quite a while on the tree, often
becoming embedded in the wood of the twigs.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus clausa
Pronunciation: PIE-nus KLAW-suh
Common name(s): Sand Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen; Christmas
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-458, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus clausa -- Sand Pine Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering (Fig. 3)
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.48
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Pinus clausa -- Sand Pine Page 3
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Figure 3. Flower of Sand Pine.
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The trunks on Sand Pine are rarely straight. The
tree usually grows with a portion of the crown missing
or with a lean to one side. This may contribute to the
unpopularity of the tree in the landscape trade.
However, this attribute can make it well suited for
planting as an accent in any large scale landscape. It
is especially useful and attractive when planted in a
lawn area as a single specimen. It certainly has its
place in reclamation sites as a colonizer of poor soils.
The tolerance to dry, sandy soils should make this tree
adaptable to conditions created near asphalt and other
hot areas in urban landscapes.
Sand Pine should be grown in full sun on any
well-drained soil. The tree is highly drought- and salttolerant.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.