Fact Sheet ST-481
October 1994
Pinus virginiana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Virginia Pine.
Virginia Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This scrubby North American native tree is most
often found growing in the poorest sites and will easily
adapt to most soil conditions, except alkaline soils
(Fig. 1). Capable of reaching up to 70 feet in height,
Virginia Pine is more often seen from 20 to 40 feet in
height with a 20 to 35-foot spread. The yellowishgreen, 1.5 to 3-inch-long, flexible, evergreen needles
are joined by the numerous, mature, prickly cones.
The thin, orange/brown bark becomes ridged and
furrowed on older trees, and is often seen due to the
open branching habit.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus virginiana
Pronunciation: PIE-nus ver-jin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Virginia Pine, Scrub Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; reclamation plant; specimen; Christmas tree;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 40 feet
Spread: 20 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-481, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus virginiana -- Virginia Pine Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.48
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pinus virginiana -- Virginia Pine Page 3
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
Figure 3. Foliage of Virginia Pine.
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although considered to have an untidy appearance
because of an irregular habit, the very low branches
which stay on the tree help make Virginia Pine a
popular choice in the South for culture as a Christmas
tree. The trees grow moderately fast in cultivation and
have a branching structure which tolerates pruning
quite well. Pruning or shearing increases branchiness
to create a nice Christmas tree. Can also be used for
an open-branched specimen in a large-scale landscape.
Tolerant of a wide variety of soil types, Virginia
Pine prefers to be grown in full sun on well-drained,
loamy soil. It grows on soil too dry, rocky or clayey
for most other plants, particularly Pines, but prefers
acidic pH. It is useful as a reclamation tree due to the
ability to seed itself in and tolerance to poor, dry soil.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
No pests are normally serious to this pine in the
landscape, although the list of possible problems is
long.
Diseases
No diseases are normally serious to this pine in
the landscape, although the list of possible problems is
long.