Fact Sheet ST-468
October 1994
Pinus nigra
Figure 1. Middle-aged Austrian Pine.
Austrian Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Austrian Pine is medium to fast-growing, reaching
40 to 60 feet in the landscape, taller on very old
specimens (Fig. 1). Combined with the dark green
needles, the dense habit makes for an outstanding
specimen tree. The pyramidal crown which becomes
flat topped and somewhat irregular on older specimens
is comprised of thick horizontal branches sweeping
horizontally and up as they spread from the trunk.
Lower branches are held on the trunk making this a
nice, short-trunked specimen or screen plant. Plant it
so the lower branches can be left on the trunk to show
the true beauty of this Pine. Dark furrowed bark is
very attractive, particularly on older trees.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus nigra
Pronunciation: PIE-nus NYE-gruh
Common name(s): Austrian Pine, Black Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; specimen; tree has been successfully
grown in urban areas where air pollution, poor
drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-468, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus nigra -- Austrian Pine Page 2
Growth rate: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: stout; thick
Pinus nigra -- Austrian Pine Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Austrian Pine.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It will stand dryness and exposure, is well adapted
to urban conditions including alkaline and clay soil
and tolerates road and seaside salt well. Some
members of the population may not be adapted to
alkaline soil. Unfortunately, Austrian Pine is very
susceptible to tip blight in the east and for this reason
should be used sparingly. There are also some recent
reports of Pine wilt nematode infesting trees and
killing them in one season. But it is one of the best
Pines for Texas and is highly recommended there.
Austrian Pine is difficult to transplant so should be
planted from containers or moved balled and
burlapped after being root pruned.
Propagation is by seed.
There are few cultivars: ‘Austriaca’ - stout,
broadly ovate; ‘Pyramidalis’ - pyramidal.
Pests
Some adelgids will appear as white cottony
growths on the bark. All types produce honeydew
which may support sooty mold. European Pine shoot
moth causes young shoots to fall over. Infested shoots
may exude resin. The insects can be found in the
shoots during May. Pesticides are only effective when
caterpillars are moving from overwintering sites to
new shoots. This occurs in mid to late April or when
needle growth is about half developed.
Bark beetles bore into trunks making small holes
scattered up and down the trunk. Stressed trees are
more susceptible to attack. The holes look like
shotholes. Keep trees healthy.
Sawfly larvae caterpillars are variously colored but
generally feed in groups on the needles. Some sawfly
larvae will flex or rear back in unison when disturbed.
Sawflies can cause rapid defoliation of branches if left
unchecked.
Pine needle miner larvae feed inside needles
causing them to turn yellow and dry up.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
on the needles. Pine tortoise scale is brown and found
on twigs. Depending on the scale, horticultural oil
may control overwintering stages.
Pine spittle bug lives and hides in a foamy mass.
Spruce mites cause damage to older needles, and
are usually active in the spring and fall. Mites cause
older needles to become yellowed or stippled.
Zimmerman Pine moth larvae bore into the trunk.
The only outward symptoms may be death of parts of
the tree or masses of hardened pitch on the branches.
Pinus nigra -- Austrian Pine Page 4
The larvae of Pine weevils feed on the sapwood of
the leaders. The leader is killed and the shoots
replacing it are distorted. First symptoms are pearl
white drops of resin on the leaders. The leaders die
when the shoot is girdled as adults emerge in August.
Prune out and burn infested terminals before July 15.
Pine wilt nematode can be a serious problem.
Infested trees can die in one growing season. There is
no control at this time.
Diseases
Diplodia tip blight is common on Austrian Pine
and disfigures trees are they reach 25 to 30 years of
age. The new growth turns brown and the branch is
stunted. Black fruiting bodies may be found on needle
bases within the sheath. Fungicides are sometimes
suggested to control the disease but as yet no
satisfactory control measures have been developed.
Needle blight infects Austrian Pine. Dark, slightly
swollen bands form on one year old needles in late
summer. The part of the needles beyond the band
dies. Severely infected trees look thin.