Fact Sheet ST-466
October 1994
Pinus glabra
Figure 1. Mature Spruce Pine.
Spruce Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This heavily-foliated, much-branched evergreen
has a bushy, irregular canopy of dark green, soft, two
to three-inch, twisted needles and a trunk that often
becomes twisted and curved with age (Fig. 1). Do not
expect a row of Spruce Pine to form a uniformlyshaped canopy of pine needles. The lower branches
on Spruce Pine making it ideal for use as a windbreak,
large-scale screen or specimen and also creates light
shade beneath larger trees. Although capable of
reaching 80 feet in height in the woods, Spruce Pine is
often seen at 30 to 50 feet when grown in the open
and grows slowly. The reddish grey-brown bark has
shallow ridges and furrows. The 2.5-inch-diameter
cones remain on the branches for three to four years
and are a source of food for wildlife.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus glabra
Pronunciation: PIE-nus GLAY-bruh
Common name(s): Spruce Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; specimen; residential street tree;
Christmas tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 60 feet
Spread: 25 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-466, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus glabra -- Spruce Pine Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval (Fig. 3)
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.44
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Pinus glabra -- Spruce Pine Page 3
Figure 3. Fruit of Spruce Pine.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing in full sun on moist fertile soils, this
North American native will also tolerate poor, dry
soils, as well as wet sites better than other Pines.
Many people forget how picturesque this Pine can
become as it grows older. It should be used more as
specimen tree. Pines are deep-rooted except on
poorly-drained sites where there will be only shallow
roots. The tap root can make them difficult to
transplant from the wild.
Pines grow best on acid soil and are usually not
recommended for planting in soil which have a high
soil pH. Grows best without grass competition.
Spruce Pine is unusual among the Pines in that it will
grow in partial shade.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Some adelgids will appear as white cottony
growths on the bark. All types produce honeydew
which may support sooty mold. European Pine shoot
moth causes young shoots to fall over. Infested shoots
may exude resin. The insects can be found in the
shoots during May. Pesticides are only effective when
caterpillars are moving from overwintering sites to
new shoots. This occurs when needle growth is about
half developed.
Bark beetles bore into trunks making small holes
scattered up and down the trunk. Stressed trees are
more susceptible to attack. The holes look like
shotholes. Keep trees healthy.
Sawfly larvae are variously colored but generally
feed in groups on the needles. Some sawfly larvae
will flex or rear back in unison when disturbed.
Sawflies can cause rapid defoliation of branches if left
unchecked.
Pine needle miner larvae feed inside needles
causing them to turn yellow and dry up.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
on the needles. Pine tortoise scale is brown and found
on twigs. Depending on the scale, horticultural oil
may control overwintering stages.
Pine spittle bug lives and hides in a foamy mass
but is relatively harmless.
Spruce mites cause damage to older needles, and
are usually active in the spring and fall. Mites cause
older needles to become yellowed or stippled.
Diseases
Resistant to fusiform rust. Canker diseases may
occasionally cause dieback of landscape Pines. Keep
trees healthy and prune out the infected branches.