Fact Sheet ST-456
October 1994
Pinus bungeana
Figure 1. Mature Lacebark Pine.
Lacebark Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Lacebark Pine is a very picturesque multi-trunked
and upright, oval tree through about age 40, then
begins spreading into a flattened canopy allowing
filtered sunlight beneath (Fig. 1). The beautiful
grey/green, mottled, exfoliating bark becomes chalky
white on mature trees and is one of the best Pines for
this character. Cultivated in the Orient for its striking
bark, Lacebark Pine can be often seen on the grounds
of Buddhist temples. Capable of reaching 75 feet in
height, it is more often seen at 30 to 50 feet with a 20
to 35-foot spread and has a rounded to pyramidal
outline when young. Those planting the tree will wait
a long time to see the tree display its true virtue, for
growth is slow at best. The stiff, two to four-inchlong needles are sharp to the touch, as are the light
brown, two to three-inch-wide, rounded cones.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus bungeana
Pronunciation: PIE-nus bun-jee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Lacebark Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 12 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-456, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus bungeana -- Lacebark Pine Page 2
or less identical crown forms
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to grow
with several trunks but can be trained to grow with a
single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Pinus bungeana -- Lacebark Pine Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Lacebark Pine.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Locate the tree where passers-by can view the
trunk character, such as along a walk or near a patio
or deck. Trees have a reputation for splitting apart in
snow and ice storms. This can probably be largely
prevented by training newly planted trees to one
central leader and eliminating weakly attached trunks
and branches, but this will spoil the striking multitrunked habit so characteristic of the tree.
Growing best in full sun on well-drained, acid soil,
Lacebark Pine may tolerate soil with a higher pH but
should not be exposed to soils which are excessively
wet or dry. The trees are also reportedly sensitive to
air pollution.
Propagation is by seed or grafting.
Pests and Diseases
There are a large number of pests and diseases
reported on Pine.