Fact Sheet ST-478
October 1994
Pinus taeda
Figure 1. Mature Loblolly Pine.
Loblolly Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Loblolly Pine is a North American native which is
usually seen from 50 to 80 feet tall with a 30-footspread though it is capable of reaching more than 150
feet in height (Fig. 1). This extremely fast-growing
pine is pyramidal when young making it ideal for
screening but loses its lower limbs as it grows older
becoming a tall, stately specimen, windbreak, or
dappled-shade tree. The six to nine-inch-long
evergreen needles turn light green to brown during the
winter. The often-paired cones are three to six inches
long, red/brown, and have very sharp spines. They
persist on the tree for several years and mature in the
fall. The bark of Loblolly Pine is very thick which
helps make this tree very resistant to fire in the wild.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus taeda
Pronunciation: PIE-nus TEE-duh
Common name(s): Loblolly Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; screen; shade tree; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 80 feet
Spread: 30 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-478, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus taeda -- Loblolly Pine Page 2
Crown shape: oval
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval (Fig. 3)
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.51
Pinus taeda -- Loblolly Pine Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Fruit of Loblolly Pine.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Pines are often grouped together in a landscape
and they are becoming more popular for planting in
parks and in commercial landscapes. They create a
light shade which allows grass and other plants to
easily grow beneath the canopy. People often
complain about the dropping needles, but these may be
the same people who complain when it rains.
Loblolly Pine should be grown in full sun on welldrained, acid soil. It is drought-tolerant once
established.
The cultivar ‘Nana’ reaches only 8 to 16 feet in
height making it ideal for use as a specimen or screen.
It has a dense, rounded silhouette and may become
popular, especially for small-scale landscapes, once
people discover it.
Propagation is by seed. Young trees larger than
four feet tall are very difficult to transplant.
Pests
Some of this tree’s pests are pine bark beetle,
borers, pine tip moth, and sawflies.
Diseases
Loblolly is susceptible to fusiform rust and heart
rot.