Fact Sheet ST-470
October 1994
Pinus parviflora
Figure 1. Young Japanese White Pine.
Japanese White Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese White Pine creates a striking landscape
element wherever it is used (Fig. 1). Often seen as a
dense, conical form when young, Japanese White Pine
develops into a 25 to 50-foot-tall, graceful, irregularlyshaped tree, with an equal or greater spread, and a
broad, flattened canopy. The 1 to 2.5-inch-long
needles are stiff and twisted, forming blue/green tufts
of foliage at branch tips, and creating an overall fine
texture to the tree’s silhouette. The brownish-red
cones are one to four inches long and persist on the
tree for six to seven years.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus parviflora
Pronunciation: PIE-nus par-vih-FLOR-uh
Common name(s): Japanese White Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; screen; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 50 feet
Spread: 25 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: spreading; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-470, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus parviflora -- Japanese White Pine Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pinus parviflora -- Japanese White Pine Page 3
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese White Pine.
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
When looking for a small, picturesque specimen
Pine for a coastal landscape, search no more. One of
the best specimens in any landscape, Japanese White
Pine is a pleasure to behold with attractive foliage in
all seasons. Set it off in the landscape with a low
ground cover beneath or locate it in the lawn, but keep
the grass cleared away from the thin-barked trunk.
Japanese White Pine should be grown in full sun
on well-drained soil with adequate moisture. The trees
are salt-tolerant, and tolerate moderate drought and
moist, clay soil.
Cultivars include: ‘Brevifolia’, upright, narrow
tree, sparsely branched, blue/green foliage in tight
bundles; and ‘Glauca’, available in nurseries, greenish
foliage with a touch of silver, wide-spreading tree, 45
feet high or more.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
There are a large number of pests and diseases on
Pine.