Fact Sheet ST-463
October 1994
Pinus elliottii
Figure 1. Mature Slash Pine.
Slash Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The species elliottii is a large, stately, heavilybranched, long-needled conifer has a rapid growth rate
and is capable of reaching 100 feet in height with a
three to four-foot-diameter trunk (Fig. 1). The sixinch-long cones appear among the dark green, eightinch-long needles, and are favored by wildlife.
Squirrels are particularly fond of the seeds, as they
chew open the cones and litter your sidewalk or
driveway with debris. The grey-brown bark is deeply
furrowed and scaly.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus elliottii
Pronunciation: PIE-nus ell-ee-OTT-ee-eye
Common name(s): Slash Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
reclamation plant; screen; shade tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 75 to 100 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-463, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus elliottii -- Slash Pine Page 2
Fall color: no fall color change
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.59
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pinus elliottii -- Slash Pine Page 3
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
Figure 3. Foliage of Slash Pine.
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Slash Pine is self-pruning of its lower branches, is
somewhat pyramidal when young and forms an open,
rounded canopy creating a light, dappled shade
beneath. This allows just enough sun to filter through
for maintenance of a lawn beneath this tall, evergreen
tree or for underplantings of dogwoods, azaleas,
camellias and other plants which thrive in this high,
shifting shade. Aggressive root competition takes
place beneath Pines so the shrubs and lawn beneath
and around the canopy often require more frequent
irrigation, particularly during the dry season. Pines
have some deep roots except in poorly-drained soil
where all roots are shallow. The tap root is prominent
in well drained soil and can make them difficult to
transplant from the wild.
Slash Pine grows well on a variety of acidic soils
in full sun or partial shade. It does poorly in basic
soil (high pH) and so is not recommended for soils
with high pH, or where irrigation water has a high pH.
Once established, it is more tolerant of wet sites than
most other Pines and is moderately salt-tolerant. It is
not highly drought-tolerant but more so than most
other Pines. The horizontal branches break easily in
ice storms. Trunks which break in hurricanes break
several feet up from the ground. Since shaded lower
branches die and drop as the tree grows taller be
careful not to plant them too close to high traffic areas
where branches could fall on people or vehicles, unless
there is a regular maintenance plan to remove them.
Open-grown trees keep more lower branches, probably
due to greater sun exposure.
This native plant is becoming more popular as a
landscape plant and is often planted in groups to create
a natural-like setting. It is also used as a screen
although it is quite unsuited for this purpose because
lower branches are not retained in the tree and it
grows with an open form. Needles seem to fall from
the tree all during the year creating slippery walks.
Needles will need to be regularly raked from the lawn
in refined landscapes.
Probably the most serious problem of Pines in
areas with high pH irrigation water is Pine chlorosis.
Pines gradually turn yellow and begin dying soon after
construction activities have begun, or when high pH
irrigation water is applied regularly to the root zone.
Symptoms appear as micronutrient deficiencies (iron
and manganese). Landscape managers have applied
fertilizers to the root zone and foliage and, more
recently, directly into the trunk through injection tubes.
These are probably temporary solutions to a problem
which is caused by a complex of activities, including
root injury and removal during construction, overfertilization, and application of high pH irrigation
water. The problem is probably best prevented by
eliminating turf from beneath the canopy and
withholding high pH irrigation from the root zone.
The root zone on trees extends to about three times the
dripline.
Pinus elliottii -- Slash Pine Page 4
Pine is the state tree of Arkansas, North Carolina,
and Alabama. Pinus elliottii var. densa, the famous
"Dade County Pine" of hardwood fame, extends from
the Florida Keys up into central Florida. Development
continues to remove these but nurseries are growing it
to be replanted in the landscape in USDA hardiness
zones 9, 10, and 11. It grows slower than the species,
reaching about 40 feet tall with a rounded crown in
30-years. It could make a wonderful street tree, if set
back from the roadway.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Bark beetles and wood borers can be a serious
problem on trees impacted by construction. These
include the IPS beetle, the turpentine beetle and the
southern Pine beetle. Tip moth damages trees in parts
of its range.
Sawfly larvae are variously colored but generally
feed in groups on the needles. Some sawfly larvae
will flex or rear back in unison when disturbed.
Sawflies can cause rapid defoliation of branches if left
unchecked.
Pine needle miner larvae feed on the inside of
needles causing them to turn yellow and dry up.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
on the needles. Pine tortoise scale is brown and found
on twigs. Depending on the scale, horticultural oil
may control overwintering stages.
Pine spittle bug lives and hides in a foamy mass.
Spruce mites cause damage to older needles, and
are usually active in the spring and fall. Mites cause
older needles to turn yellow.
Diseases
Very susceptible to fusiform rust in USDA
hardiness zones 8 through 10. Oaks serve as an
alternate host to this fungus. Select resistant trees.
Pitch canker can be a serious problem. It appears
to be more of a problem in manged landscapes where
trees receive regular applications of nitrogen.
Needle cast causes needles to drop during the
winter, but control is usually not needed.