Fact Sheet ST-472
October 1994
Pinus pinea
Figure 1. Mature Stone Pine.
Stone Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Just as its name implies, Umbrella Pine has a
broad, somewhat flattened round canopy, and the tree
will ultimately reach 80 to 100 feet in height though it
is more often seen at 35 to 45 feet tall and wide (Fig.
1). The bright green, stiff, six-inch-long needles are
arranged in slightly twisted bundles, and are joined by
the heavy, five to six-inch-long cones which remain
tightly closed on the tree for three years. The trunk is
showy with narrow, foot-long orange plates set off
nicely by darker fissures.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus pinea
Pronunciation: PIE-nus pie-NEE-uh
Common name(s): Stone Pine, Italian Stone Pine,
Umbrella Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; fruit tree; large parking lot islands (>
200 square feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet
wide); medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200
square feet in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet
wide); recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
screen; shade tree; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 45 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-472, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus pinea -- Stone Pine Page 2
Leaf venation: parallel
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pinus pinea -- Stone Pine Page 3
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
Figure 3. Foliage of Stone Pine.
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It is the seeds inside the cones which are of
particular interest, called pignolia or Pine nuts in the
stores. The closed cones are gathered, then laid out in
the direct sun which forces them to open so the seeds
can be harvested. Eaten raw or roasted like peanuts,
pignolia nuts are a traditional ingredient of certain
Italian dishes. In fact, the tree is native to southwest
Europe around the Mediterranean to Greece and Asia
Minor, and remains of the cones have been discovered
in Roman camps in Britain attesting to their long-time
popularity.
Umbrella Pine has not been extensively tried as a
street tree except in parts on California where it has
done well, but has the attributes of an urban tolerant
tree. Drought and salt tolerance is high making it
suited for areas such as western Texas and Olkahoma.
Grows well in soil with a pH in the mid 7’s or lower,
but may do poorly with higher pH. Umbrella Pine
should be grown in full sun on well-drained soil.
Winter winds and low temperature in USDA hardiness
zone 7a cause needles to brown and they remain
unsightly all winter.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
There are a a large number of pests on Pine.
Diseases
This tree is usually disease-free.