Fact Sheet ST-467
October 1994
Pinus mugo
Figure 1. Middle-aged Mugo Pine.
Mugo Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Mugo Pine is a shrub or small, round or broad
pyramidal plant 4 to 10 feet tall which grows best in
sun or partial shade in moist loam (Fig. 1). Needles of
this two-needle Pine are held on the tree for more than
four years making this one of the more dense Pines
suitable for a screen planting. Most other Pines are
not suited for screens since they loose their inner
needles and lower branches as they grow older. Since
there seems to be great variability in height among
individual trees, select nursery plants which have the
form which you desire. When selecting a Mugo Pine
to grow into a tree, choose one with a central leader; if
looking for a more dwarf type Mugo Pine choose
among the many compact selections.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus mugo
Pronunciation: PIE-nus MEW-go
Common name(s): Mugo Pine, Swiss Mountain Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; screen;
Christmas tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-467, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus mugo -- Mugo Pine Page 2
Fall color: no fall color change
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Pinus mugo -- Mugo Pine Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Mugo Pine.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trees best recover from transplanting when moved
balled and burlapped, not bare-root. It performs
remarkably well on soils with a high pH and is fairly
well adapted to urban sites. Plant size and density can
be controlled by pinching the elongating candles just
before or as the needles begin emerging but this is
usually not needed on Mugo Pine since growth is very
dense. Pines are deep rooted except on shallow,
poorly-drained soil where there will be only shallow
roots.
Several cultivars are available: ‘Compacta’ -
rounded, three feet tall; ‘Gnome’ - about 12 feet tall;
‘Hesse’ - dwarf; var. mugo - 2 1/2 to six feet tall but
very broad; var. pumilo - prostrate.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Mugo Pine is a favored host for Pine sawfly and
Pine needle scale. Some adelgids will appear as white
cottony growths on the bark. All types produce
honeydew which may support sooty mold. European
Pine shoot moth causes young shoots to fall over.
Infested shoots may exude resin. The insects can be
found in the shoots during May. Pesticides are only
effective when caterpillars are moving from
overwintering sites to new shoots. This occurs in mid
to late April or when needle growth is about half
developed.
Bark beetles bore into trunks making small holes
scattered up and down the trunk. Stressed trees are
more susceptible to attack. The holes look like
shotholes. Keep trees healthy.
Sawfly larvae caterpillars are variously colored but
generally feed in groups on the needles. Some sawfly
larvae will flex or rear back in unison when disturbed.
Sawflies can cause rapid defoliation of branches if left
unchecked.
Pine needle miner larvae feed inside needles
causing them to turn yellow and dry up.
Pine needle scale is a white, elongated scale found
on the needles. Pine tortoise scale is brown and found
on twigs. Depending on the scale, horticultural oil
may control overwintering stages.
Pine spittle bug lives and hides in a foamy mass.
Spruce mites cause damage to older needles, and
are usually active in the spring and fall. Mites cause
older needles to become yellowed or stippled.
Zimmerman Pine moth larvae bore into the trunk.
The only outward symptoms may be death of parts of
the tree or masses of hardened pitch on the branches.
The larvae of Pine weevils feed on the sapwood of
the leaders. The leader is killed and the shoots
replacing it are distorted. First symptoms are pearl
white drops of resin on the leaders. The leaders die
when the shoot is girdled as adults emerge in August.
Prune out and burn infested terminals before July 15.
Pine wilt nematode can kill trees.
Pinus mugo -- Mugo Pine Page 4
Diseases
Diplodia tip blight is a common problem and
Mugo Pine is very sensitive.
This pine is susceptible to rusts. Canker diseases
may rarely cause dieback of landscape Pines. Keep
trees healthy and prune out the infected branches.
Needle cast is common on small trees and
plantation or forest trees. Infected needles yellow and
fall off.