Fact Sheet ST-464
October 1994
Pinus flexilis
Figure 1. Young Limber Pine.
Limber Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This North American native tree, 30 to 50 feet
high and 15 to 35 feet wide, has a fairly wide,
pyramidal silhouette when young but slowly matures
into a broad tree with a flattened canopy (Fig. 1).
Almost looks square as it reaches 20-years-old. The
2.5 to 3.5-inch-long, dark blue/green needles are joined
by light brown, 1.5-inch-wide, hanging cones which
add to the tree’s overall attractiveness. Limber Pine is
so-named due to the flexible nature of the branches.
Young branches can literally be tied into a knot. The
tree has the overall look of a White Pine when it is
young.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pinus flexilis
Pronunciation: PIE-nus FLECK-sih-liss
Common name(s): Limber Pine
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-464, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pinus flexilis -- Limber Pine Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Pinus flexilis -- Limber Pine Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Limber Pine grows best in full sun or partial shade
on moist, well-drained soil but will easily adapt to
harsher sites. Some horticulturists say they grow
better under poor cultural conditions of drought and
compacted clay soil. It adapts to wet soil by growing
a shallow root system. One of the most tolerant of
cold, windy weather in the winter and is not cold
damaged when most other Pines show needle
browning.
A few of the cultivars include: ‘Columnaris’, very
upright form, 10 feet wide; ‘Glauca’, foliage is a
deeper blue/green than the species; ‘Glauca Pendula’,
irregular, wide-spreading shrub with blue/green
needles; ‘Glenmore Dwarf’, small, upright, pyramidal
tree with blue/grey foliage; ‘Nana’, dwarf bushy type;
and ‘Pendula’, wide, weeping silhouette.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
There are a large number of pests and diseases on
Pine.