Fact Sheet ST-482
October 1994
Pistacia chinensis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Chinese Pistache.
Chinese Pistache1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Finely divided, lustrous, dark green foliage, bright
red fruit (on female trees) ripening to dark blue,
peeling, attractive bark, and wonderful fall colors
combine to make Chinese Pistache an outstanding
specimen, shade, or street tree (Fig. 1). Capable of
reaching 60 feet in height with a 25 to 35-foot spread,
Chinese Pistache is usually seen at 25 to 35 feet in
height with an oval, rounded canopy and light, open
branching creating light shade. Branches form a vaseshape which is particularly evident during the winter.
Lower branches often droop to the ground with time,
forming a wonderfully spreading crown. Older, more
mature trees become more dense and uniformlyshaped. Young trees are asymmetrical and a bit
awkward-looking unless properly pruned in the
nursery. For this reason, it has not been widely
planted but should be due its adaptability to urban
soils.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pistacia chinensis
Pronunciation: piss-TAY-shee-uh chih-NEN-sis
Common name(s): Chinese Pistache
Family: Anacardiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-482, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pistacia chinensis -- Chinese Pistache Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue; green; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Pistacia chinensis -- Chinese Pistache Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Pistache.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The wood is extremely durable and the outer,
grey-brown, fissured bark flakes off to reveal the
attractive, salmon red or orange inner bark. The
colorful red-orange to pink fruits appear in large
panicles and are quite showy in late summer and
autumn in USDA hardiness zones 8 and 9 but do not
cause a significant litter problem. Fall color is reliably
bright red or orange in USDA hardiness zone 8 and
colder areas and makes one of the most brilliant shows
of any tree, but fall color is less reliable in warmer
climates. This is one of the last trees to color in the
fall, extending the fall color show in many parts of the
south into November.
The tree needs special pruning and training in the
early years to create branches in desirable places along
the trunk. It often grows with few branches, or with
branches clustered at one point on the trunk, if it was
topped in the nursery. To train an unbranched young
sapling, prune the top to force development of several
branches. Pick one to be the trunk, another to be a
branch and remove the rest. Allow the tree to grow
taller and again top the unbranched trunk 18 to 24
inches above the first pruning cut to force branch
development there. Build the tree in this fashion until
a desirable structure with well spaced branches is
achieved.
This is certainly an underutilized urban tree. It
has merit for wider use in urban street tree plantings
and in other adverse sites due to its drought tolerance,
adaptability, moderate size, and wonderful form and
fall color. It is hard to go wrong with Chinese
Pistache in all areas within its range. Its range is
occasionally extended to hardiness zone 6a.
Chinese Pistache grows quickly in full sun to
partial shade on moderately fertile, well-drained soils
and will withstand heat and drought extremely well.
The crown is quite round and symmetrical on older
specimens when grown in full sun but becomes
misshapen in too much shade - best for full sun areas.
Grows in clay, loam, or sand in a wide range of soil
pH.
Chinese Pistache is used as the understock on
which the commercial pistachio nut (Pistacia vera) is
grafted. The cultivar ‘Keith Davey’ has outstanding
autumn color.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
No pests are of major concern. This tree is about
as pest-free as any tree.
Diseases
Verticillium wilts and oak root fungus occasionally
affect Chinese Pistache.