Fact Sheet ST-483
October 1994
Pithecellobium flexicaule
Figure 1. Mature Ebony Blackbead.
Ebony Blackbead1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This 15 to 30-foot-tall evergreen tree is native to
Texas and Mexico and is ideal for use in dry, desert
landscapes (Fig. 1). The short branches are clothed in
very small, dark green leaflets and make up a 15 to
20-foot-wide rounded canopy which casts medium
shade below. Short thorns are interspersed among the
branches. From June to August, Texas Ebony is
decorated with dense, plume-like spikes of very
fragrant, light yellow to white blossoms. The dark
brown to black, woody seed capsules which follow are
four to six inches long and persist on the tree. In
Mexico, the seeds from these pods are eaten, and the
black woody shells have been known to be roasted as
a coffee substitute in times past. The attractive, short
trunk of Texas Ebony is covered with smooth, grey
bark. It makes a nice medium-sized shade tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pithecellobium flexicaule
Pronunciation: pith-eh-sell-LOE-bee-um
fleck-sih-KAWL-ee
Common name(s): Ebony Blackbead, Texas-Ebony
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; even pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-483, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pithecellobium flexicaule -- Ebony Blackbead Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black; brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; no significant litter problem;
persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: stout; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Pithecellobium flexicaule -- Ebony Blackbead Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Ebony Blackbead.
Preferring well-drained, alkaline soils, Texas
Ebony will thrive in full sun with little water once
established. Trees are tolerant of wind and compacted
soil, helping to make them a popular choice for arid
landscapes.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Be
careful not to over-irrigate.