Fact Sheet ST-487
October 1994
Platanus x acerifolia ‘Bloodgood’
Figure 1. Middle-aged ‘Bloodgood’ London Planetree.
‘Bloodgood’ London Planetree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A large tree resulting in a cross between Platanus
orientalis and Platanus occidentalis suitable for use in
USDA hardiness zone 4b or warmer (Fig. 1). The tree
will reach a height of 85 feet and a spread of 70 feet.
Pyramidal in youth, it develops a spreading rounded
crown with age supported by a few, very largediameter branches. These branches should be spaced
two to four feet apart along the trunk to develop a
strong structure. The dominant central leader which
typically develops on London Planetree usually assures
that the structure of major limbs is desirable with little
corrective pruning required other than removing
occasionally occurring upright branches with tight
crotches. It is also helpful to thin out the many
branches which develop early on the central trunk.
The bark is patchy and very attractive and may be the
plants best ornamental attribute. These patches range
from creamy-white to olive-green. Large sections of
bark may be shed from the tree as it grows older.
This is normal and only needs to be disposed of.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Platanus x acerifolia ‘Bloodgood’
Pronunciation: PLAT-uh-nus x
ass-er-ih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): ‘Bloodgood’ London Planetree
Family: Platanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-487, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Platanus x acerifolia ‘Bloodgood’ -- ‘Bloodgood’ London Planetree Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 70 to 85 feet
Spread: 50 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; incised
Leaf shape: ovate; star-shaped
Leaf venation: pinnate; palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Platanus x acerifolia ‘Bloodgood’ -- ‘Bloodgood’ London Planetree Page 3
Current year twig thickness: medium
Figure 3. Foliage of ‘Bloodgood’ London Planetree.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The plant tolerates dry soil (but scorches in dry
weather) and city conditions well, adapts to most soils
including alkaline and is more resistant (not immune)
to the anthracnose that afflicts Platanus occidentalis.
However, it is susceptible to canker stain, a disease
which has caused its demise in some areas, and is
often seen infested with lace bugs which will not kill
the tree but causes premature defoliation in late
summer. It is also reported to be susceptible to ozone
pollution injury in laboratory tests at levels often
present during the summer, but damage from air
pollution in the landscapes appears minimal. Some
people object to the large leaves which often begin
falling from the tree in late summer.
Some horticulturists consider this a messy tree due
to early leaf drop from drought, bark shedding, and
lace bugs. Leaves blow around in the wind during the
fall and decompose slowly in the landscape creating a
distinctive "crunch" underfoot. Leaves make great
compost in a compost pile.
Some tree managers limit use as a street tree due
to its large size, susceptibility to canker stain, bacterial
leaf scorch, and lace bug injury. But it is a good
durable tree for many areas where soil is poor and
compacted. Also somewhat tolerant of coastal
conditions, and well-adapted to areas with poor
drainage. But it may be best saved for moist sites
with plenty of room for root and crown expansion.
The National Arboretum in 1984 released two
Platanus occidentalis x Platanus orientalis which
could prove to be superior to the parents: Platanus x
acerifolia ‘Columbia’ - upright, orange-grey bark, fivelobed leaves; Platanus x acerifolia ‘Liberty’ - upright
pyramid, five-lobed leaves, reportedly more resistant to
powdery mildew and anthracnose, though not immune.
Pests
Aphids will suck the sap from Planetree leaves.
Heavy infestations deposit honeydew on lower leaves
and objects beneath the tree, such as cars and
sidewalks.
Sycamore lace bugs feed on the undersides of the
leaves causing a stippled appearance and premature
defoliation in late summer. The insects leave black
flecks on the lower leaf surface. Neither aphids nor
lace bugs will kill the tree.
Diseases
Some fungi cause leaf spots.
Anthracnose: ‘Bloodgood’ has been shown to be
resistant to anthracnose, but it is not immune.
Platanus x acerifolia ‘Bloodgood’ -- ‘Bloodgood’ London Planetree Page 4
Anthracnose causes early symptoms on young leaves
resembling frost injury. When the leaves are almost
fully grown light brown areas appear along the veins.
Later the infected leaves fall off and trees may be
nearly completely defoliated in spring or early
summer. The disease can cause twig and branch
cankers and a witches-broom appearance at the end of
the branches. The trees send out a second crop of
leaves but repeated attacks can lower tree vigor. Use
a properly labeled fungicide to help control the
disease. Fertilization helps trees withstand repeated
defoliation.
Canker stain is very serious on London Planetree
and can kill the tree.
Bacterial leaf scorch can devastate London
Planetree.