Fact Sheet ST-484
October 1994
Platanus occidentalis
Figure 1. Mature Sycamore.
Sycamore1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sycamore is a massive tree reaching 75 to 90 feet
in height, has a rapid growth rate, and tolerates wet
and compacted soil (Fig. 1). The white bark peels off
in patches and is the most ornamental trait. Pyramidal
in youth, it develops a spreading rounded or irregular
crown with age, supported by a few very large
diameter branches. These branches should be spaced
two to four feet apart along the trunk to develop a
strong structure. The dominant central leader which
typically develops on Sycamore usually assures that
the structure of major limbs is desirable with little
corrective pruning required other than removing
occasionally-occurring, upright, aggressive branches
with tight crotches. It is also helpful to thin out the
many branches which develop early on the central
trunk.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Platanus occidentalis
Pronunciation: PLAT-uh-nus ock-sih-den-TAY-liss
Common name(s): Sycamore, American Planetree
Family: Platanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; screen; shade tree; sidewalk
cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 75 to 90 feet
Spread: 50 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-484, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Platanus occidentalis -- Sycamore Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; incised
Leaf shape: ovate; star-shaped
Leaf venation: pinnate; palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.49
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Platanus occidentalis -- Sycamore Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Sycamore.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
They are best suited for soils which are moist and
do not dry out. Dry soil can lead to short life for this
wet-site-tolerant tree. Sycamore has been cursed by
horticulturists and others because it is said to be
messy, dropping leaves and small twigs throughout the
year, particularly in dry weather. However, the tree
grows in places which appear most unsuitable to plant
growth, such as in small cut out planting pits in
sidewalks and in other areas with low soil oxygen and
high pH. Unfortunately, aggressive roots often raise
and destroy nearby sidewalks. The dense shade
created by the tree’s canopy may interfere with the
growth of lawn grasses beneath it. In addition, the
leaves which fall to the ground in autumn reportedly
release a substance which can kill newly planted grass.
Best not planted in yards due to messy habit, it should
be saved for the toughest sites and supplied with some
irrigation in drought. Allow at least 12 feet
(preferrably more) of soil between the sidewalk and
curb when planting as a street tree.
Sycamore is subject to attacks of anthracnose in
wet, cool springs. The disease causes moderate to
severe leaf drop and many trees are removed with this
disease each year in our major cities. Many trees also
defoliate early in the fall due to lace bug infestation.
Therefore, do not overplant with Sycamore since they
are so prone to problems.
The National Arboretum in 1984 released two
selections of Platanus occidentalis x Platanus
orientalis which could prove to be superior to the
parents: Platanus x acerifolia ‘Columbia’ - upright,
orange-grey bark, five-lobed leaves; Platanus x
acerifolia ‘Liberty’ - upright pyramid, five-lobed
leaves, reportedly more resistant to powdery mildew
and anthracnose, though not immune.
Propagation is by seed, cultivars by hard or soft
wood cuttings.
Pests
Aphids will suck the sap from Sycamore. Heavy
infestations deposit honeydew on lower leaves and
objects beneath the tree, such as cars and sidewalks.
These infestations usually do no real harm to the tree
but the sticky honeydew and black sooty mold below
can be annoying.
Sycamore lace bugs feed on the undersides of the
leaves causing a stippled appearance. The insects
leave black flecks on the lower leaf surface, and cause
premature defoliation in late summer and early fall.
Sycamore is considered resistant to gypsy moth.
Diseases
Some fungi cause leaf spots but are usually not
serious.
Anthracnose causes early symptoms on young
leaves resembling frost injury. When the leaves are
almost fully grown light brown areas appear along the
veins. Later the infected leaves fall off and trees may
be nearly completely defoliated. The disease can
cause twig and branch cankers. The trees send out a
second crop of leaves but repeated attacks can lower
tree vigor. Use a properly labeled fungicide according
Platanus occidentalis -- Sycamore Page 4
to the latest recommendations. Fertilization helps trees
withstand repeated defoliation.
Powdery mildew causes a white fuzz on the tops
of leaves and distorts leaves.
A bacterial leaf scorch can kill the tree in several
growing seasons, and can cause significant tree losses.
Leaves appear scorched, become crisp, and curl up as
they turn a reddish-brown.
Stress cankers form on limbs of trees stressed with
drought.