Fact Sheet ST-489
October 1994
Platycladus orientalis
Figure 1. Mature Arborvitae.
Arborvitae1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Arborvitae is an easily-recognized shrub, with its
large teardrop shape and flattened branchlets held
vertically (Fig. 1). Most young plants are seen as
shrubs, but they can be pruned into a small tree by
removing the lowest branches. This forms a
distinctive vase shape and is common on older
landscapes where the plant was located too close to a
walk or home.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Platycladus orientalis
Pronunciation: plat-ih-KLAY-dus or-ee-en-TAY-liss
Common name(s): Arborvitae
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
screen; specimen; tree has been successfully grown in
urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: whorled (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: deltoid; scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-489, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Platycladus orientalis -- Arborvitae Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Platycladus orientalis -- Arborvitae Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Arborvitae.
Arborvitae does not tolerate pruning well since all
foliage is toward the outside of the crown, but it is
well-suited for use as a barrier, background, or
specimen planting in a large landscape where it is
properly located so pruning is not needed. Its
distinctive appearance does not fit easily into natural
or informal landscapes. It is often planted in
cemeteries and referred to as Cemetery Plant.
Arborvitae grows moderately fast in full sun or
very light shade and tolerates drought well once
established. Sandy or loam soil is best, clay soil is
only suited on a slope where drainage is good.
Available cultivars include: ‘Aureus’, 3 to 5 feet
tall, compact, golden leaves in spring, globe-shaped;
‘Baker’, height 7 to 9 feet, bright pale green foliage,
hardy in hot, dry areas; ‘Berckmanii’, height 4 to 6
feet, compact and globe-shaped with golden-tipped
branchlets; ‘Bonita’, cone-shaped, 3 feet tall, leaves
with yellow tips; ‘Globosa’, globe-shaped dwarf;
‘Juniperoides’, 3 feet tall, juvenile foliage needle-like,
purplish foliage in fall; ‘Meldensis’, 3 feet tall, narrow,
purplish foliage in fall.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
Pest problems include spider mites and bagworms.
A fungus blight causes the interior twigs to turn
brown. This blight can be controlled by fungicides in
early fall and by pruning out and destroying affected
areas. Locate the plant in a sunny area with good air
circulation to keep the foliage as dry as possible.