Fact Sheet ST-485
October 1994
Platanus orientalis
Figure 1. Mature Oriental Planetree.
Oriental Planetree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This deciduous tree is one of the parents of the
popular London Planetree (Platanus x acerifolia) and
has more deeply lobed leaves than its offspring (Fig.
1). Leaves are almost maple-like. Capable of
reaching 80 feet in height, the Oriental Planetree has
very strong branches and is quite useful as a shade
tree. The wood is so tough, dense and hard it is often
used for butcher’s blocks and furniture. The
springtime flowers are followed by fruits which are
found on stalks in groups of three to 6. The attractive
bark is cream colored and flaky and very striking in
the winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Platanus orientalis
Pronunciation: PLAT-uh-nus or-ee-en-TAY-liss
Common name(s): Oriental Planetree
Family: Platanaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: shade tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 70 to 80 feet
Spread: 50 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; incised
Leaf shape: ovate; star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-485, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Platanus orientalis -- Oriental Planetree Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
Platanus orientalis -- Oriental Planetree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Oriental Planetree.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It was widely planted in many northern cities but
bacterial leaf scorch and canker stain have killed many
trees in these communities. If this tree is planted, do
so with moderation to avoid these unfortunate
problems.
Naturally found along streams and floodplain
riverbeds, Oriental Planetree should be grown in full
sun or partial shade on moist soils. It grows on acid
or alkaline soil, wet or dry. Leaves may drop early in
dry years. Should be grown primarily for its
resistance to anthracnose disease which can be
devastating to American Sycamore, but it is now rare
in the trade in the United States.
Pests and Diseases
Canker stain and stem canker can severely weaken
or kill trees. Anthracnose can be serious in wet years,
although this Planetree is more resistant than American
Sycamore. Probably lace bug, and others.