Fact Sheet ST-490
October 1994
Plumeria alba
Figure 1. Middle-aged White Frangipani.
White Frangipani1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Frangipani is well-known for its intensely fragrant,
lovely, spiral-shaped blooms which appear at branch
tips June through November (Fig. 1). The tree itself is
rather unusual in appearance; the 20-inch-long, coarse,
deciduous leaves clustered only at the tips of the
rough, blunt, sausage-like, thick, grey-green branches.
Branches are upright and rather crowded on the trunk
forming a vase or umbrella shape with age. They are
rather soft and brittle and can break but are usually
sturdy unless they are mechanically hit or disturbed.
A milky sap is exuded from the branches when they
are bruised or punctured.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Plumeria alba
Pronunciation: ploo-MEER-ee-uh AL-buh
Common name(s): White Frangipani
Family: Apocynaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-490, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Plumeria alba -- White Frangipani Page 2
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 12 to 18 inches; 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; pleasant
fragrance; spring flowering; summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: stout
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Plumeria alba -- White Frangipani Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of White Frangipani.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Frangipani is very susceptible to freezing
temperatures and should be adequately protected or
planted only in areas which do not freeze in the
winter. Plants will grow quickly in full sun on a
variety of well-drained soils and are fairly droughtand salt-tolerant. Reaching a height of 20 to 25 feet
with an equal spread, Frangipani works well as a
freestanding specimen, a patio tree, or as part of a
shrubbery border. It displays well in a front yard as
an attention-grabber by the entrance. It can be grown
with a single trunk or branched low to the ground into
a multi-trunked specimen. Single-trunk specimens
could be planted as median or street trees on 15 to 20-
foot-centers.
Plumeria alba has white flowers with yellow
centers while Plumeria rubra produces red-toned
flowers. Plumeria obtusa has white blooms centered
in yellow and is variable in form and color. There are
many other selections of Frangipani which display a
variety of flower colors. They are widely grown in
Hawaii where they are used in flower arrangements
and in leis.
Propagation is by cuttings. Large hardwood
cuttings should be allowed to dry several days while
leafy tip cuttings should be planted immediately. The
plants flower at an early age.
Pests
Some common pests of this tree are scales,
frangipani caterpillar, and nematodes.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern. Root rot can
infect plants planted in soils with poor drainage. Rust
disease occasionally infects foliage.