Fact Sheet ST-497
October 1994
Podocarpus nagi
Figure 1. Middle-aged Nagi Podocarpus.
Nagi Podocarpus1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This upright, dense evergreen has pointed,
leathery, dark green leaves arranged on stiff,
symmetrical branches and works very well as a screen,
hedge, strong accent plant, or framing tree (Fig. 1).
The crown forms a somewhat pyramidal to oval
outline. Able to reach 90 feet in height, Nagi
Podocarpus is usually seen at 30 to 40 feet in height
due to the moderately-slow growth rate. Compact
branching habit and very dark green foliage make this
a dense tree in full sun, more open but surprisingly
dense in shade.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Podocarpus nagi
Pronunciation: poe-doe-KAR-pus NAY-jye
Common name(s): Nagi Podocarpus, Broadleaf
Podocarpus
Family: Podocarpaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; suitable for growing indoors; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; screen; shade tree; specimen; sidewalk
cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal; upright
Crown density: dense
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-497, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Podocarpus nagi -- Nagi Podocarpus Page 2
Growth rate: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Podocarpus nagi -- Nagi Podocarpus Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Nagi Podocarpus.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing well in full sun, partial or deep shade,
Nagi Podocarpus tolerates a wide range of welldrained soils. In Florida, established trees grow well
with no irrigation. Plants will show nutrient
deficiencies on alkaline soils. The typical symptom is
a wide yellow band or stripe across the leaves, usually
attributed to magnesium deficiency. This is a tough
tree, adaptable to urban conditions. It should be used
more in areas with poor soils and restricted rooting
space. With some pruning to create a more open
canopy with well spaced ascending branches along the
trunk, Nagi Podocarpus could make a good street tree.
Eliminate branches with narrow angles of attachment
in favor of those with a wider angle.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings.
Pests
Scale and sooty mold can be found on Nagi
podocarpus but this is usually not serious.
Diseases
It is susceptible to root rot on soils with poor
drainage.