Fact Sheet ST-492
October 1994
Podocarpus falcatus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Podocarpus.
Podocarpus1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Podocarpus falcatus grows very slowly, probably
to 40 feet or more in an open landscape, but has
reached 100 feet in its native habitat (Fig. 1). The
two-inch long, blue foliage borne on a rigid pyramidal
canopy would make a striking specimen in any
landscape. It casts dense shade when branched to the
ground, so no grass grows beneath it. It lends a rigid,
formal effect to any landscape due to the stiff,
horizontal branches, but the blue foliage softens this
effect. It could be used as a specimen or as a screen
planted 10 to 15 feet apart.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Podocarpus falcatus
Pronunciation: poe-doe-KAR-pus fal-KAY-tus
Common name(s): Podocarpus
Family: Podocarpaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-492, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Podocarpus falcatus -- Podocarpus Page 2
Fall color: no fall color change
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: unknown
Podocarpus falcatus -- Podocarpus Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Podocarpus.
The tree prefers a rich, moist soil, and benefits
from irrigation in dry weather. Trees benefit from a
layer of mulch extending beyond the edge of the
branches. This keeps roots cool and reduces moisture
loss from the soil. Grows in full sun or the shade on
the north side of a building. This tree has not been
grown in nurseries but should be tried.
Pests and Diseases
The tree has not been grown much and the pest
and disease problems are poorly understood.