Fact Sheet ST-494
October 1994
Podocarpus latifolius
Figure 1. Mature Podocarpus.
Podocarpus1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Podocarpus latifolius grows in an upright,
weeping habit to 100 feet tall in its native habitat, but
in open landscapes may be much smaller (Fig. 1). It
would be a good selection for narrow overhead spaces
due to the narrow branch crown. The blue-green
foliage and striking habit make this an obvious
candidate for planting as a specimen in a formal
landscape. Unfortunately, it is not available in the
nursery trade.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Podocarpus latifolius
Pronunciation: poe-doe-KAR-pus lat-ih-FOLE-ee-us
Common name(s): Podocarpus
Family: Podocarpaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 75 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-494, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Podocarpus latifolius -- Podocarpus Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; spiral (Fig.
3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear; oblong
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Podocarpus latifolius -- Podocarpus Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Podocarpus.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: unknown
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree prefers a rich, moist soil, and benefits
from irrigation in dry weather. Trees benefit from a
layer of mulch extending beyond the edge of the
branches. This keeps roots cool and reduces moisture
loss from the soil. Grows in full sun or the shade on
the north side of a building. This tree has not been
grown in nurseries but should be tried.
Pests and Diseases
The tree has not been grown much and the pest
and disease problems are poorly understood.