Fact Sheet ST-495
October 1994
Podocarpus macrophyllus
Figure 1. Young Podocarpus.
Podocarpus1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
With densely foliated lower limbs which reach the
ground and neat, dark green, evergreen leaves,
Podocarpus is very popular as a dense screen or hedge
(Fig. 1). However, Podocarpus can reach 40 to 50 feet
in height when not sheared and is quite attractive as a
tree with the lower branches removed, revealing the
light brown, peeling bark. If space permits, leave the
lower limbs on the tree for an almost spruce-like
appearance. The tree grows in an open manner with
large spaces between the branches creating a pleasing,
irregular oval silhouette in middle and old age. The
inconspicuous flowers are followed by fleshy, purple,
small, edible fruits (very good to eat) on female trees
which are quite attractive to birds but not really messy
on sidewalks or pavement.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Podocarpus macrophyllus
Pronunciation: poe-doe-KAR-pus mack-roe-FILL-us
Common name(s): Podocarpus, Yew-Pine, Japanese
Yew
Family: Podocarpaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: espalier; hedge; suitable for growing indoors;
large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking
lot islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; screen; trainable as a standard; shade tree; small
parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow
tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-495, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Podocarpus macrophyllus -- Podocarpus Page 2
common
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; opposite/subopposite;
whorled (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: irregular; oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Podocarpus macrophyllus -- Podocarpus Page 3
Current year twig color: green
Figure 3. Foliage of Podocarpus.
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This is one of a few trees which can be pruned
into a nice hedge. The dark green foliage and dense
growth creates a formal mass. It looks better when
pruned with a hand pruner, not sheared with a hedge
trimmer.
Showing best growth and form in full sun,
Podocarpus will grow more slowly and have a looser
appearance when grown in shade. It will grow on the
north side of a tall building with little or no direct sun.
It will tolerate a wide variety of well-drained, acidic
soils. Don’t plant on wet soils. This is a tough tree,
adaptable to urban conditions and should be used
much more extensively as a street tree. It should be
used more in areas of poor soils and restricted rooting
space. Unfortunately, most people choose to trim the
tree into a column or hedge, so not many have seen
the true beauty of the tree. It will make an attractive
specimen, street or parking lot tree, even for the
smallest soil space in a downtown planting pit. Roots
are not a problem in restricted-soil planting areas and
usually do not lift sidewalks.
Many varieties are available for selection of habit,
leaf form, color, etc. Podocarpus macrophyllus var.
angustifolius is a narrow, columnar tree with curved
leaves, 2 to 4.5 inches long; Podocarpus macrophyllus
var. appressus is a low shrub with short leaves;
Podocarpus macrophyllus var. maki has erect
branches, columnar form, 1.5 to 3-inch-long leaves.
Propagation is by seeds or cuttings. Hardwood
cuttings root easily. Cutting propagation would ensure
more uniform trees than seedlings. Nursery operators
should be encouraged to grow Podocarpus in the
single-trunked tree form for planting in urban
landscapes.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.
Occasionally bothered by scale, mites, and sooty mold
but not seriously. Some magnesium-deficiency on
sandy soil, which is easily corrected with magnesium
sulfate.