Fact Sheet ST-498
October 1994
Pongamia pinnata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Pongam.
Pongam1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Pongam is a fast-growing evergreen tree which
reaches 40 feet in height and spread, forming a broad,
spreading canopy casting moderate shade (Fig. 1).
The three-inch-long, pinnately compound, glossy green
leaves are briefly deciduous, dropping for just a short
period of time in early spring but being quickly
replaced by new growth. In spring, Pongam is at its
finest when the showy, hanging clusters of white, pink,
or lavender, pea-like, fragrant blossoms appear, the
clusters up to 10 inches long. These beautiful
blossoms and the glossy, nearly-evergreen leaves help
make Pongam a favorite for use as a specimen, shade,
or windbreak. It has also been planted as a street tree,
but dropping pods often litter the ground. However,
the seeds which are contained within the oval, 1.5-
inch-long, brown seedpods are poisonous, a fact which
should be considered in placing the tree in the
landscape, if many children are present.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pongamia pinnata
Pronunciation: pawn-GAM-ee-uh pih-NAY-tuh
Common name(s): Pongam, Karum Tree, Poonga-Oil
Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; shade tree; specimen; residential street tree;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 40 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-498, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pongamia pinnata -- Pongam Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2
inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender; pink; white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Pongamia pinnata -- Pongam Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Pongam.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Pongam should be grown in full sun or partial
shade on well-drained soil. A relatively lowmaintenance tree once established, Pongam is resistant
to high winds and drought but is susceptible to
freezing temperatures below 30-degrees F. Pongam
will show nutritional deficiencies if grown on soil with
a pH above 7.5.
Space major limbs along the trunk to increase the
structural strength of the tree. Keep limbs less than
two-thirds the diameter of the trunk to help ensure that
branches are well secured to the tree.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
No pests are of major concern, but caterpillars
occasionally cause some defoliation.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.