Fact Sheet ST-501
October 1994
Populus nigra ‘Italica’
Figure 1. Mature Lombardy Poplar.
Lombardy Poplar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Often planted for its fast growth and usefulness as
a short-lived screen or windbreak, Lombardy Poplar
forms a slender column of many short, upwardpointing branches and can reach 40 to 60 feet in
height with a spread of only 10 to 12 feet (Fig. 1).
But canker disease almost always infects the tree by
the time the tree is 10 to 15 years old so trees are
rarely seen larger than about 30 feet tall by five feet
wide. The triangular to diamond-shaped, 2 to 3.5-
inch-long by 1.5 to 3-inch-wide deciduous leaves are
bright green on both sides throughout the year, turning
a blazing golden yellow in fall before dropping. The
small, inconspicuous flowers appear in spring. The
bark is grey/green on young trees and new growth, but
becomes black, thickened, and furrowed on older,
larger trunks.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Populus nigra ‘Italica’
Pronunciation: POP-yoo-lus NYE-gruh
Common name(s): Lombardy Poplar
Family: Salicaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 10 to 12 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-501, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Populus nigra ‘Italica’ -- Lombardy Poplar Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrate
Leaf shape: deltoid; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
There is no fruit on this tree.
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Populus nigra ‘Italica’ -- Lombardy Poplar Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Lombardy Poplar.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
If planted, Lombardy Poplar should be grown in
full sun on well-drained, acid or alkaline soil. It
tolerates wet soil well but also performs in drought,
losing leaves early in very dry summers. Multiple
suckers often appear at the base of trees and
occasionally on roots far from the tree, and the roots
are considered invasive. Also, the trees are,
unfortunately, very susceptible to stem canker disease
which usually limits their life to only 10 or 15-years.
Plant other narrow-crowned trees including ‘Fastigiate’
European Hornbeam, Armstrong Maple, ‘Fastigiata’
Alder, Fastigiate English Oak, Leyland Cypress, and
others instead of this tree.
Propagation is by cuttings since Lombardy Poplar
is a male clone.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Stem canker disease is so devastating that this tree
is usually not included on any recommended tree lists,
with the exception of a reclamation site. Choose from
the many other available columnar or upright
screening trees for a more durable planting.