Fact Sheet ST-499
October 1994
Populus alba
Figure 1. Middle-aged White Poplar.
White Poplar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
White Poplar is a fast-growing, deciduous tree
which reaches 60 to 100 feet in height with a 40 to
50-foot-spread and makes a nice shade tree, although it
is considered short-lived (Fig. 1). The dark green,
lobed leaves have a fuzzy, white underside which
gives the tree a sparkling effect when breezes stir the
leaves. These leaves are totally covered with this
white fuzz when they are young and first open. The
fall color is pale yellow. The flowers appear before
the leaves in spring but are not showy, and are
followed by tiny, fuzzy seedpods which contain
numerous seeds. It is the white trunk and bark of
white poplar which is particularly striking, along with
the beautiful two-toned leaves. The bark stays smooth
and white until very old when it can become ridged
and furrowed. The wood of White Poplar is fairly
brittle and subject to breakage in storms and the soft
bark is subject to injury from vandals. Leaves often
drop from the tree beginning in summer and continue
dropping through the fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Populus alba
Pronunciation: POP-yoo-lus AL-buh
Common name(s): White Poplar
Family: Salicaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; shade tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 100 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-499, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Populus alba -- White Poplar Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: white
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Populus alba -- White Poplar Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of White Poplar.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
White Poplar should be grown in full sun and
tolerates almost any soil, wet or dry. Suckering may
be a problem on stressed trees but those growing
vigorously are usually not bothered. In areas with
much air pollution and soot, the fuzzy white
undersides of the leaves may attract and hold dirt and
dust making them unattractive.
It’s large size and brittle wood limit it to open
space plantings such as parks and landfill sites.
The cultivar ‘Bolleana’ has a columnar growth
habit and irregularly-lobed leaf margins and ‘Pendula’
has a weeping form. ‘Bolleana’ may be the most
commonly planted cultivar.
Pests
This tree usually has not pests of major concern,
but occasionally leafhoppers bother it. There are many
potential problems.
Diseases
Crown gall and trunk cankers can be troublesome.