Fact Sheet ST-502
October 1994
Prosopis glandulosa
Figure 1. Mature Mesquite.
Mesquite1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This North American native tree reaches 30 feet in
height and forms a rounded canopy with many
drooping, crooked branches emanating low on the
trunk (Fig. 1). These branches are armed with oneinch-long spines which can cause much damage to
flesh, but thornless selections are available from
nurseries. Mesquite has a tendency to form thickets
and these thorns help make the dense growth
impenetrable. The reddish-brown bark is rough and
fissured. The root system of Mesquite is quite
extensive and will spread far and wide to consume
whatever moisture is available, sometimes to the
detriment of other plantings near the tree. Mesquite is
considered a weed along the Rio Grande and in other
areas in Texas where it will easily invade adjacent
land.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prosopis glandulosa
Pronunciation: pro-SO-piss gland-yoo-LOW-suh
Common name(s): Mesquite, Honey Mesquite
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: bipinnately compound; even pinnately
compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: linear
Leaflet venation: none, or difficult to see; parallel
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-502, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prosopis glandulosa -- Mesquite Page 2
Fall color: no fall color change
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Prosopis glandulosa -- Mesquite Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Mesquite.
The bright green, pinnately compound leaves lend
a fine texture to this irregular-shaped tree which casts
a light shade. When given adequate moisture and
trained and pruned to create a somewhat uniformlyshaped crown, Mesquite can be an attractive,
somewhat weeping landscape specimen. From May to
September, Mesquite is adorned with two-inch-wide,
extremely fragrant blooms which are not especially
showy due to their yellow to greenish-white coloration
but are still easily found by bees who love them. The
seeds which follow are quite popular with birds and
other wildlife and, at times, man. The southwestern
native Americans used the seed, or beans, as a food
source. The beans contain as much as 30% sugar and,
when fermented, produce an alcoholic beverage. A
meal made from the beans was also used by native
Americans to make bread.
Mesquite should be grown in full sun on welldrained soil. The tree is very drought tolerate. Young
plants can be successfully transplanted while small, but
they need irrigation until established. Fire used to
limit its invasive habit. It has become an
unimaginable weed in Texas due to fire control. Prior
to fire control, heat from flames killed many trees and
this kept the tree from spreading throughout the
region.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
It is occasionally bothered by borers.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.