Fact Sheet ST-514
October 1994
Prunus sargentii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Sargent Cherry.
Sargent Cherry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
With attractive bark, good fall foliage color, and
delicate pink blooms, Sargent Cherry is highly
recommended for the home and urban landscape (Fig.
1). Growing at a moderate rate into a 25 to 40-foothigh, upright-spreading to rounded tree, Sargent
Cherry makes an ideal shade tree, spreading as wide as
it is tall and casting dense shade below. It is often
grown with several multiple trunks or upright branches
originating from the same position on the trunk
ascending in a graceful fashion. This structure could
be somewhat of a problem in ice-storms. Training to
develop well-spaced branches along the trunk may
help reduce this problem. The attractive cinnamon
brown bark has a shiny, almost polished appearance
with prominent lenticels arranged around the trunk. In
late April or early May the one-inch-wide, pink to
deep pink single blooms appear before the new redtinged leaves unfold. The small, pea-sized fruits
which follow are red, ripening to a dark purple in June
and July. The fruits are considered inconspicuous due
to their size and color but are easily found by birds
who quickly devour them. The three to five-inch-long,
shiny, dark green leaves take on various shades of
orange, bronze, and red before dropping in late
September, often well before other trees which are still
green.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus sargentii
Pronunciation: PROO-nus sar-JEN-tee-eye
Common name(s): Sargent Cherry
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade tree;
narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-514, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus sargentii -- Sargent Cherry Page 2
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; purple; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk;
tree wants to grow with several trunks but can be
trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium
Prunus sargentii -- Sargent Cherry Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Sargent Cherry.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Sargent Cherry works well as a street tree
(probably the best of the cherries for street planting) in
areas which can accommodate the spreading canopy.
It can be planted along the entry road to a subdivision
or commercial landscape on 20-foot-centers or in the
tree lawn space between the curb and sidewalk. It is
also very effective as a specimen in the lawn or
landscape bed.
Sargent Cherry should be grown in full sun on
very well-drained, acid soil. Although it grows
moderately fast and can reach up to 60 feet tall in the
wild, it is relatively short-lived with perhaps a 20-year
lifespan, but provides reliable service during this
period. Sargent Cherry requires little maintenance
once established and is quite tolerant of drought and
clay soil.
The cultivar ‘Columnaris’ has a narrow, upright or
columnar silhouette 30 to 40 feet tall by 15 feet wide
and is very suitable for tight urban spaces, and along
streets.
Propagation is by seed, grafting, or budding.
Pests and Diseases
This cherry is bothered by tent caterpillars, aphids,
borers, and scales. It is probably less susceptible to
disease than most other cherries.