Fact Sheet ST-507
October 1994
Prunus cerasifera ‘Atropurpurea’
Figure 1. Middle-aged Pissard Plum.
Pissard Plum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Purple-leaved plum has new foliage which unfolds
as ruby red, then turns reddish-purple, and finally
matures to greenish-bronze by the end of the summer
(Fig. 1). Its fast growth rate and upright to uprightspreading nature quickly forms a 15 to 25-foot-tall,
dense silhouette. The small, white to light pink,
springtime flowers, which usually appear before the
leaves unfold, are followed by a heavy crop of edible,
one-inch-diameter purple fruits. They make a
temporary mess beneath the tree as they mature and
drop during the summer.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus cerasifera ‘Atropurpurea’
Pronunciation: PROO-nus sair-uh-SIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Pissard Plum, ‘Atropurpurea’
Cherry Plum
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: purple or red
Fall color: purple
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-507, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus cerasifera ‘Atropurpurea’ -- Pissard Plum Page 2
Fall characteristic: showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: pink; white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
Prunus cerasifera ‘Atropurpurea’ -- Pissard Plum Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Pissard Plum.
Very popular due to the unusual leaf color, many
gardeners want one of these things in their yard. But
one plant really attracts attention to an area, and it can
be overpowering in a small landscape creating a
cramped feeling. Due to the strong effect, best used in
a large-scale landscape as a single specimen, not in a
row or mass planting. It makes a nice, small
ornamental near the deck or patio but locate it far
enough away so dropping fruit will fall on the lawn or
in a groundcover bed. Do not rely on this tree to be
around for a long time since decline often begins by
the time the tree is 10 to 15-years-old.
Purple-leaved plum should be grown in full sun to
bring out the richest color of the leaves. Leaves turn
almost green in shade and loose the characteristic
purple which the buyer is usually looking for. Welldrained soil with an acid pH is preferred but it will
grow on slightly alkaline soil. Tolerant of moderate
heat and drought, it often succumbs to borers on poor,
compacted soil.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
Some of its pests are aphids, borers, scales, mealy
bugs, tent caterpillars and many others. This is not a
pest-free plant.
Diseases
Pissard plum may be infected with canker and leaf
spots.