Fact Sheet ST-504
October 1994
Prunus angustifolia
Figure 1. Young Chickasaw Plum.
Chickasaw Plum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Growing 25 feet tall and wide, Chickasaw Plum
forms a rounded mass of slender, thorny branches
sprouting from a short trunk (Fig. 1). In spring, before
the one to two-inch-long leaves appear, Chickasaw
Plum is festooned with small, white, fragrant flowers
which make the trees quite decorative in the presence
of other trees which are often still dormant. The 0.5-
inch-diameter fruits which follow are red, ripening to
yellow, and are extremely popular with wildlife and
man. The plums are either eaten fresh or used to
make a delicious jelly.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus angustifolia
Pronunciation: PROO-nus an-gus-tih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Chickasaw Plum
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet
wide); specimen; residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-504, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus angustifolia -- Chickasaw Plum Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Prunus angustifolia -- Chickasaw Plum Page 3
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
Figure 3. Foliage of Chickasaw Plum.
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Grown occasionally with a single leader and used
as a street tree, Chickasaw Plum is usually seen with a
multiple trunk planted as a specimen or in a median
strip, or planted on 15 to 25-foot-centers along the
entrance road to a commercial property. It tends to
sprout from the base of the trunk, forming multistemmed thickets. This is the form most commonly
seen in its native habitat on old fields and on other
disturbed sites. It makes a nice addition to the shrub
border in the back yard and is well suited for planting
around the patio or deck although it does not form a
neat crown and looks a little unkempt during the
winter. The crown often leans to one side or the
other. Occasional pruning can significantly improve
the form of the crown.
A North American native tree, Chickasaw Plum is
very easily grown and has no special cultural
requirements. It tolerates drought, sandy or clay soil
but does poorly in alkaline pH. These small trees
grow quickly but have a relatively short life. This
should not stop you from planting the tree since it will
serve the landscape well during its life.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Tent
caterpillar can defoliate trees and could weaken them
with repeated defoliations.