Fact Sheet ST-518
October 1994
Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’
Figure 1. Middle-aged ‘Autumnalis’ Higan Cherry.
‘Autumnalis’ Higan Cherry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Double-flowered (‘Autumnalis’) Higan Cherry is
25 to 35-foot-tall and wide tree, usually with a
multiple trunk, slender, upright branches, and a
rounded canopy (Fig. 1). The canopy on older trees
often grows wider than the tree grows tall. Before the
leaves appear in spring, the trees are covered with
many semi-double pink flowers; some flowers may
also appear in autumn if the weather is sufficiently
warm. The one to four-inch-long dark green leaves
are later joined by the appearance of small, black
berries. The leaves cast light shade below the
spreading canopy, and turn attractive fall colors of
yellow and bronze before dropping.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’
Pronunciation: PROO-nus sub-her-TELL-uh
Common name(s): ‘Autumnalis’ Higan Cherry
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway; near
a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-518, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’ -- ‘Autumnalis’ Higan Cherry Page 2
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; showy; spring
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’ -- ‘Autumnalis’ Higan Cherry Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of ‘Autumnalis’ Higan Cherry.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Use the tree along an entrance road to a
commercial development planted on 20-foot centers or
along side the patio or deck in the back yard. It also
makes a nice small-scale court yard tree or specimen
planted in the lawn or in bed of ground cover. It
could be planted along a residential street where there
is plenty of soil for root expansion. It is becoming
available in the industry.
Double-flowered Higan Cherry should be grown in
full sun or partial shade on well-drained, acid soil with
sufficient moisture. It is moderately drought-tolerant
and grows well in clay soil, as long as it drains well.
Trees grow quickly when young but slow down with
age.
Propagation is by cuttings or grafts.
Pests
Aphids cause distortion of new growth, deposits of
honeydew, and sooty mold.
Borers attack trees under stress. Keep trees
healthy with regular fertilizer applications.
Scales of several types infest prunus. Horticultural
oil is used to provide some control of overwintering
stages.
Spider mites cause yellowing or stippling but are
very difficult to see. They are usually recognized only
after plant symptoms are quite advanced.
Tent caterpillars make large webbed nests in trees
then eat the foliage. One defoliation may not be
serious and small nests can be pruned out and
destroyed. Use Bacillus thuringiensis when the insects
are first seen and are still small.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern. A bacterium
causes leaf spot and twig cankers on cherry. Small,
reddish spots dry, and drop out, giving a shot-holed
appearance. Defoliation can be severe when
conditions favor disease development. Fertilize
infected trees and prune out infected branches.
A fungus causes reddish spots which drop out
leaving shot holes. Once the holes appear the leaves
may drop. The disease is worse in wet weather.
Black knot causes black swellings or galls on the
branches. Branches with galls are pruned out.