Fact Sheet ST-505
October 1994
Prunus caroliniana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Cherry-Laurel.
Cherry-Laurel1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A dependable, easily-grown, North American
native, Cherry-Laurel is densely foliated with glossy,
dark green, evergreen leaves and can reach 40 feet in
height with a 25-foot-spread though is often seen
smaller when grown in the open (Fig. 1). CherryLaurel will create a very dense screen or hedge with
regular pruning but is also attractive when allowed to
grow naturally into its upright oval, dense form.
Properly trained to a central leader, the plant could
make a good small to medium-sized street tree. The
tree usually maintains a good central leader and smalldiameter, strong lateral branches following one or two
proper prunings before the tree is 8 to 10-years-old. It
was widely planted in Texas until the severe drought
of the early 1950’s weakened them. Many of these
weakened trees eventually died from borers.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus caroliniana
Pronunciation: PROO-nus kair-oh-lin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Cherry-Laurel, Carolina
Laurelcherry
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; screen; trainable as a
standard; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); sidewalk
cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-505, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus caroliniana -- Cherry-Laurel Page 2
Availability: generally available in many areas within
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Prunus caroliniana -- Cherry-Laurel Page 3
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Cherry-Laurel.
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
In springtime, tiny, creamy-white showy flowers
appear in dense, fragrant clusters and are followed by
small, shiny, black cherries which are quite attractive
to wildlife. The flowers attract lots of bees. The great
quantity of fruit may create a short-term litter problem
if the trees are located near a patio or walkway but the
fruit is small and washes away quickly. The quick
growth and ease of maintenance makes Cherry-Laurel
ideal for naturalizing and for low maintenance gardens
except that hundreds of seedlings can be found
beneath the crown each year from germinating seeds.
Of course, this would not be a problem in a street tree
planting or in an area such as a lawn or highway
median which is mowed regularly. Though the
crushed leaves and green twigs give off a delicious
maraschino cherry fragrance, they are quite bitter and
possibly poisonous. Root systems are often quite
shallow but usually they are not aggressive and do not
cause problems.
Preferring ample moisture while young, CherryLaurel is otherwise well-suited to sun or shade
locations on any average, well-drained soil. Once
established, it is salt- and drought-tolerant requiring
little or no irrigation. Over-irrigating can cause
chlorosis and death. Do not plant in wet, soggy areas.
The tree adapts well to soils with high pH. Clay soil
is fine as long as water doesn’t stand after it rains.
The cultivars ‘Compacta’ and ‘Bright ’N Tight’
have a very dense, compact habit of growth, to about
20 feet tall.
Propagation is by seeds, cuttings, or by digging
seedlings which appear in great numbers around
mature plants.
Pests
Some of this tree’s pests are mites, borers, and
caterpillars. Borers are troublesome on stressed trees.
Diseases
Cherry-Laurel may be infected by leaf spot, fireblight, and stem canker. It can be difficult to grow in
containers due to root rot and over-irrigation.