Fact Sheet ST-511
October 1994
Prunus mexicana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Mexican Plum.
Mexican Plum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Growing 25 to 30 feet tall with a spread of 25
feet, Mexican Plum is a North American native tree
which forms an irregular canopy composed of
yellow/green, shiny leaves with fuzzy undersides and
thorny branches (Fig. 1). In spring, the trees are
smothered with fragrant, white blooms which are
followed by purple/red, juicy fruits. These tart fruits
can be used to make jams and jellies. The blooms
help make Mexican Plum ideal for use as a specimen
tree but it also fits in nicely in the naturalized
landscape as an understory tree. The gray/black,
ridged and furrowed bark is quite attractive, and the
deciduous leaves turn a showy orange color in fall
before dropping.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus mexicana
Pronunciation: PROO-nus meck-sih-KAY-nuh
Common name(s): Mexican Plum
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-511, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus mexicana -- Mexican Plum Page 2
Fall color: orange
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; thorns are
present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Prunus mexicana -- Mexican Plum Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Mexican Plum.
This small tree is well suited for residential
landscapes. It might be best to locate the tree back
from the edge of a patio, deck or walk since the fruits
can be a little messy for a short period in the summer
or early fall. When planted in the lawn or in a bed of
low-growing ground cover, fruits drop unnoticed and
are of no concern. The tree can be a ‘show stopper’
when it is in bloom. It makes a nice tree for planting
near power lines due to its small size.
Mexican Plum should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained, rich soil but will tolerate
almost any soil. It is quite drought-tolerant once
established.
Pests or Diseases
None of major concern.