Fact Sheet ST-512
October 1994
Prunus mume
Figure 1. Young Japanese Apricot.
Japanese Apricot1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Flowering Apricot may be the longestlived of the flowering fruit trees eventually forming a
gnarled, picturesque, 20-foot-tall tree (Fig. 1).
Appearing during the winter on bare branches are the
multitude of small, fragrant, pink flowers which add to
the uniqueness of the tree’s character. The small
yellow fruits which follow the blooms are inedible but
attractive.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus mume
Pronunciation: PROO-nus MEW-may
Common name(s): Japanese Apricot
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway; near
a deck or patio; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-512, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus mume -- Japanese Apricot Page 2
Leaf venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: pink
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Prunus mume -- Japanese Apricot Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Apricot.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree is well suited for planting near the patio
or deck. Locate it where it will receive sun on all
sides of the tree to develop a uniform crown, for it
becomes one sided when exposed to sun on only one
side. It would add color to the shrub border during
the winter when most other plants are dormant. It
makes a very nice specimen in a lawn or planted as a
group to accent a building entrance.
Japanese Flowering Apricot should be grown in
full sun on well-drained, fertile, acid soils. Not
adapted to poor or dry soils. Plants will require heavy
pruning to flower their best. The tree is now being
grown by a handful of nurseries, and some nurseries
are growing a cultivar or two. Adhere to cultural
requirements for best growth.
Cultivars include: ‘Bonita’, semidouble rose-red
blossoms; ‘Dawn’, large ruffled double pink; ‘Peggy
Clarke’, double deep rose; ‘Rosemary Clarke’, double
white flowers with red calyces; and ‘W.B. Clarke’,
double pink flowers, weeping plant form. None are
really available in large quantities.
Propagation is by cuttings or by seed.
Pests
Aphids cause distortion of new growth, deposits of
honeydew, and sooty mold.
Borers attack stressed trees. Keep trees healthy
with regular fertilizer applications.
Scales of several types infest the cherries.
Horticultural oil is used to control overwintering
stages.
Spider mites cause yellowing or stippling but they
are very difficult to see.
Tent caterpillars make large webbed nests in trees
then eat the foliage. One defoliation may not be
serious and small nests can be pruned out and
destroyed. Use Bacillus thuringiensis when the insects
are first seen and are still small.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.