Fact Sheet ST-510
October 1994
Prunus maackii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Amur Chokecherry.
Amur Chokecherry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Amur Chokecherry is pyramidal when young but
ultimately forms a 30 to 40-foot-tall tree with a dense,
rounded canopy which provides light shade below
(Fig. 1). The deciduous leaves are three inches long
and are joined in early to mid-May by an explosion of
white, fragrant flowers in two to three-inch-long
racemes. The multitude of tiny black fruits which
follow ripen in August and are quite attractive to birds.
The bark is occasionally handsome cinnamon brown
peeling off in shaggy masses on the trunk, but more
often is an attractive brown with minimum exfoliation.
This tree has one of the most attractive bark features
of any tree in North America.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus maackii
Pronunciation: PROO-nus MACK-ee-eye
Common name(s): Amur Chokecherry, Manchurian
Cherry
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2B through 6 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen; residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-510, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus maackii -- Amur Chokecherry Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to grow
with several trunks but can be trained to grow with a
single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Prunus maackii -- Amur Chokecherry Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Amur Chokecherry.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Prune to open up the canopy to develop more of a
tree-form, otherwise it looks like a large shrub.
Remove interior branches and space main branches
along the trunk. A more upright shape can be created
by removing lateral branches, a more spreading shape
can be promoted by removing upright branches.
Use the tree along an entrance road to a
commercial development planted on 20 to 25-foot
centers or along side the patio or deck in the back
yard.
Amur Chokecherry should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil, and performs well only in the north.
The trees should be located where the roots can remain
moist, but not wet, as drought tolerance is not
characteristic.
Propagation is by softwood cuttings from June to
July, or by seed.
Pests
Some of its pests are borers in warm climates,
aphids, scale.
Diseases
This tree is susceptible to infection by leaf spot.