Fact Sheet ST-516
October 1994
Prunus serotina
Figure 1. Mature Black Cherry.
Black Cherry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Black Cherry is a 60 to 90-foot-tall native North
American tree which has an oval silhouette (Fig. 1).
Low branches normally droop and touch the ground.
These are easily removed to create clearance beneath
the canopy. The finely-toothed, deciduous leaves are
dark green and shiny, changing in fall for a short
period to lovely shades of yellow, orange, or red, but
this varies with weather conditions and among
seedlings. The leaves and twigs contain hydrocyanic
acid which could poison livestock or other animals if
consumed in large quantities. Wild Cherry cough
syrup is made from the reddish-brown, fragrant, and
bitter inner bark. The wood is highly prized by wood
workers and it has been used since the colonial days
for fine furniture.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus serotina
Pronunciation: PROO-nus sair-OTT-ih-nuh
Common name(s): Black Cherry
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 90 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-516, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus serotina -- Black Cherry Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrulate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: bowed; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.50
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: good
Prunus serotina -- Black Cherry Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Black Cherry.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
In early spring as the new leaves are unfolding,
Black Cherry produces small, white, fragrant blossoms.
These are followed by small, bitter fruits which mature
during summer and fall from red to dark purple or
black. Sometimes used for jams, jellies, or liqueurs,
these fruits are highly prized by birds and other
wildlife who quickly devour them as they ripen. They
stain concrete as they fall in summer, and people can
roll on the hard seed. If you plant Black Cherry, it is
probably best to locate it away from walks and
pavement. The tree appears to be tolerant of drought
in its native habitat where roots are allowed to explore
a large volume of soil, but growth is often poor in
restricted soil spaces characteristic of urban areas.
Black Cherry should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained, non-compacted soil in a
location where it will not receive excessive heat or
competition from grasses. Although somewhat tolerant
of dry conditions, Black Cherry will respond best to
rich, moist soil and a heavy mulch to keep the root
zone cool. Plants should not be disturbed after
becoming established and have a fairly shallow root
system, making them susceptible to damage from
anything stacked, stored, or parked within the dripline
and slightly beyond.
Propagation is by seed which is spread by birds
and other wildlife.
Pests
Black Cherry is susceptible to eastern tent
caterpillar, fall webworm, other chewing insects, but
they are usually enough of a problem to warrant
control.
Prunus serotina -- Black Cherry Page 4
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern. Black Cherry is
a host for Ganoderma root and butt rot.