Fact Sheet ST-513
October 1994
Prunus persica
Figure 1. Young Peach.
Peach1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Widely popular for their sweet, juicy fruits and
beautiful blossoms, Peach trees are actually plagued by
so many different pests and diseases that they should
probably only be planted by the horticulturally
dedicated homeowner (Fig. 1). A low, broad tree, 15
to 25 feet tall with an equal or greater spread, Peach
trees form a rounded crown with upwardly-reaching
branches clothed in three to six-inch-long, dark green,
deciduous leaves. The lovely flowers which appear in
April before the new leaves unfold are available in
single, semi-double, and double forms in colors
ranging from pure white to deep red and bicolors. The
flowers are susceptible to damage by late spring frosts
or especially cold winters. The luscious three-inchdiameter fruits mature in July to August. Bright
yellow fall color really stands out in many years.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Prunus persica
Pronunciation: PROO-nus PER-sick-uh
Common name(s): Peach
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; espalier; fruit tree; hedge;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-513, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Prunus persica -- Peach Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink; red; white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Prunus persica -- Peach Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Peach.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
They have been successfully used in medians of
boulevards and around parking lots in a number of
Texas communities. They make effective screens for
six to seven-months due to their dense, low-branching
habit, but are not particularly attractive in winter.
Avoid excessive pruning as this stimulates internal
sprouting. Many trees live only 8 to 15-years.
Peach trees should be located in full sun or partial
shade on very well-drained, moist, acid soils. The
trees should be kept on a regular spray and fertilization
schedule to insure best fruit production but this is not
needed if fruit is not important. Do not allow water to
stand around the roots.
Propagation is by cuttings or grafting.
Pests
Aphids cause distortion of new growth, deposits of
honeydew, and sooty mold.
Borers attack flowering Peach. Keep trees healthy
with regular fertilizer applications.
Scales of several types infest Prunus spp.
Horticultural oil is used for some control of scales.
Spider mites cause yellowing or stippling but they
are very difficult to see.
Tent caterpillars make large webbed nests in trees
then eat the foliage. One defoliation may not be
serious and small nests can be pruned out and
destroyed. Use Bacillus thuringiensis when the insects
are first seen and are still small.
Diseases
Peach leaf curl can attack flowering Peach. The
leaves have red, curled, and distorted areas.
A bacterium causes leaf spot and twig cankers on
Peach. Small, reddish spots dry, and drop out, giving
a shot holed appearance. Defoliation can be severe
when conditions favor disease development. Fertilize
infected trees and prune out infected branches.
A fungus causes reddish spots which drop out
leaving shot holes. Once the holes appear the leaves
may drop. The disease is worse in wet weather, but
usually does not require control measures.
Black knot causes black swellings or galls on the
branches. Branches with galls are pruned out.
Powdery mildew causes a white coating on the
leaves.
Peach trees may be subject to witches broom.
Branches are deformed and clusters of small branches
Prunus persica -- Peach Page 4
form. Infected branches bloom and leaf out earlier.
Brooms are pruned out.