Fact Sheet ST-526
October 1994
Pseudotsuga menziesii
Figure 1. Young Douglas-fir.
Douglas-fir1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Douglas-Fir grows 40 to 60 feet and spreads 15 to
25 feet in an erect pyramid in the landscape (Fig. 1).
It grows to more than 200 feet tall in its native habitat
in the West. Hardiness varies with seed source, so be
sure it was collected from an area with suitable coldhardiness to the area in which it will be used.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pseudotsuga menziesii
Pronunciation: soo-doe-SOO-guh men-ZEE-zee-eye
Common name(s): Douglas-fir
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 6 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: screen; specimen; Christmas tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: needle-like (filiform)
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-526, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pseudotsuga menziesii -- Douglas-fir Page 2
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see; parallel
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.48
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Pseudotsuga menziesii -- Douglas-fir Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Douglas-fir.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Douglas-Fir is most commonly used as a screen or
occasionally a specimen in the landscape. Not suited
for a small residential landscape, it is often a fixture in
a commercial setting. Allow room for the spread of
the tree since the tree looks terrible with lower limbs
removed. It is grown and shipped as a Christmas tree
in many parts of the country.
The tree prefers a sunny location with a moist soil
and is not considered a good tree for much of the
South. It grows but struggles in USDA hardiness zone
7. Douglas-Fir transplants best when balled and
burlapped and has a moderate growth rate. It tolerates
pruning and shearing but will not tolerate dry soil for
extended periods. Protect from direct wind exposure
for best appearance. Some occasional watering in
summer dry spells will help the tree stay vigorous,
especially in the southern end of its range.
Cultivars are: ‘Anguina’ - long, snake-like
branches; ‘Brevifolia’ - short leaves; ‘Compacta’ -
compact, conical growth; ‘Fastigiata’ - dense,
pyramidal; ‘Fretsii’ - dense bush, short broad leaves;
‘Glauca’ - bluish foliage; ‘Nana’ - dwarf; ‘Pendula’ -
long, drooping branchlets; ‘Revoluta’ - curled leaves;
‘Stairii’ - variegated leaves.
Pests
Aphids infestations on small trees may be
dislodged with a strong stream of water from the
garden hose.
Scale and bark beetles may infest Douglas-Fir,
especially those under stress.
Diseases
Root rot can be a serious problem on clay and
other wet soils.
Needles infected by leaf cast fungi in spring turn
brown and fall off.
Several fungi cause canker diseases leading to
branch dieback. Maintain tree health and prune out
infected branches.