Fact Sheet ST-525
October 1994
Pseudolarix kaempferi
Figure 1. Young Golden Larch.
Golden Larch1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large but graceful, uncommon deciduous
conifer reaches 40 to 70 feet in height with a straight
trunk and a spread of 20 to 40 feet (Fig. 1). Since it
grows very slowly, it is usually not seen more than 30
to 40 feet tall. The silhouette is a rather open but
symmetrical pyramidal shape with pendulous branch
tips. The fine-textured needled foliage is 1.5 to 2
inches long and pale green above, blue/green below.
The foliage turns a brilliant yellow in the fall for a
short time but long enough to make a very striking
landscape statement. The three-inch-long, upright
cones are interspersed along the branches, and the
reddish-brown bark is rugged and furrowed.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pseudolarix kaempferi
Pronunciation: soo-doe-LAIR-icks KEM-fer-eye
Common name(s): Golden Larch
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 70 feet
Spread: 20 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-525, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pseudolarix kaempferi -- Golden Larch Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear; needle-like (filiform)
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Pseudolarix kaempferi -- Golden Larch Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Golden Larch.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The attractive bark, strong pyramidal shape, and
wide-spreading branches make Golden Larch
particularly attractive in the winter landscape. Its slow
growth and attractive form makes it a popular choice
for containers and for use as a bonsai. It can be used
in residential landscapes since it grows at a slow rate.
Plant it in the open so the form can be fully
appreciated. Locate it far enough from sidewalks and
buildings so lower branches will not have to be
pruned.
Golden Larch should be grown in full sun on
deep, rich, well-drained, moist acid soil where the
trees can be protected from harsh, cold winds. The
trees should not be planted in limestone soils and they
are not tolerant of clay unless located on a slope where
drainage would be excellent.
The cultivar ‘Nana’ is a dwarf form.
‘Annesleyana’ is a dense, dwarf form with weeping
branches.
Propagation is by seed, although it is difficult to
obtain fertile seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.