Fact Sheet ST-529
October 1994
Psidium littorale
Figure 1. Middle-aged Cattley Guava.
Cattley Guava1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This upright, multi-branched, evergreen shrub or
small tree has many features which make it a popular
landscape choice (Fig. 1). Unfortunately, Cattley
Guava has escaped cultivation and has infested ditch
banks and other wild areas in south Florida, and its
use should be tempered. Capable of reaching 25 feet
in height but often seen at 10 to 15 feet, the thick,
smooth, dark green, four-inch-long, leathery leaves
nicely complement the smooth, grey-brown to golden
bark which attractively peels off in thin sheets. The
single, white, one-inch-diameter flowers have many
prominent stamens and look like powderpuffs in
miniature. The blooms appear heaviest in April but
can open sporadically throughout the year.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Psidium littorale
Pronunciation: SID-ee-um lit-aw-RAY-lee
Common name(s): Cattley Guava, Strawberry Guava
Family: Myrtaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
fruit tree; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 12 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-529, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Psidium littorale -- Cattley Guava Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; suited for human consumption;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; tree
wants to grow with several trunks but can be trained to
grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Psidium littorale -- Cattley Guava Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Cattley Guava.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The 1.5-inch-diameter, bright red, pear-shaped
fruits ripen to a very dark red in July and are a
popular treat - for people and wildlife. Birds,
raccoons, and squirrels all love the delicious, sweettart, white flesh and will widely spread the small,
grape-like seeds. The abundant, fallen fruits may be
messy on hard surfaces such as walks and cars, and
trees should probably not be planted along residential
streets or over sidewalks or patios. It would make a
good small boulevard or median street tree and accents
an area with its well-shaped canopy and interesting
trunk form. It combines well with other plants in a
shrub border and provides both food and cover for
wildlife.
Cattley Guava grows well in full sun or partial
shade on a wide range of soils, including sand or clay,
but fruit quality is improved on rich soils. Plants are
drought-tolerant once established but benefit from a
thick, organic mulch. Any necessary pruning should
be done after fruiting. Pick the fruit for eating before
the fruit fly larvae discover it.
Psidium littorale var. littorale, Lemon Guava, is
slower-growing and has large yellow fruits with
delightful, spicy flavor.
Propagation is by air-layerings or by seeds. Seeds
germinate easily and rapidly. Seedling plants take
seven or eight years to bear fruit.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern. Fruit
fly larvae devour the fruit but do no harm to the tree.