Fact Sheet ST-530
October 1994
Ptelea trifoliata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Common Hoptree.
Common Hoptree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This deciduous North American native tree reaches
about 15 feet in height with a spread of 10 to 15 feet
and forms a broad, rounded canopy over a slender,
grey trunk (Fig. 1). The trifoliate, four to six-inchlong leaves are shiny and dark green on top, pale and
hairy below, turning yellow in fall before dropping.
Inconspicuous greenish-white flowers appear in
terminal clusters in June and July, their presence easily
detected by the delicious orange blossom-like perfume.
The blooms are followed by interesting, one-inchdiameter, flattened, tan "wafers" which will persist on
the tree if not first consumed by wildlife. In the past,
this bitter fruit was used as a substitute for hops in
brewing beer.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ptelea trifoliata
Pronunciation: TEE-lee-uh try-fole-ee-AY-tuh
Common name(s): Common Hoptree, Wafer-Ash
Family: Rutaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; near a deck
or patio; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 5 to 15 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound; trifoliate
Leaflet margin: entire; serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); obovate; ovate
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-530, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ptelea trifoliata -- Common Hoptree Page 2
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; no significant litter problem;
persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Ptelea trifoliata -- Common Hoptree Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Common Hoptree.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
One of a few small trees which performs well in
deep shade. Plant it close to the patio or deck, or
locate it in a shrub border for fragrant flowers and
yellow fall color display. Its native habitat is dry,
rocky upland sites making it well-suited for unirrigated
landscapes.
Naturally found in the shade along the edges of
woods, especially on rocky slopes in the Mississippi
Valley, Wafer-Ash can be planted in full sun to deep
shade and prefers well-drained, fertile, moist soil.
While plants are better off if not exposed to extremes
of wetness or dryness, Wafer-Ash is drought-tolerant
once established. It transplants readily from the field.
Cultivars include: ‘Aurea’, new leaves bright
yellow fading to pale green; and ‘Glauca’, blue/green
foliage.
Propagation is by seed, budding, layering, or
grafting.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern although
it is occasionally bothered by tree-hoppers, leaf spot,
and rust. Tree hoppers can discolor the foliage and
cause premature defoliation.