Fact Sheet ST-533
October 1994
Pterocarya stenoptera
Figure 1. Young Chinese Wingnut.
Chinese Wingnut1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chinese Wingnut is a 40 to 70-foot-tall, deciduous
tree with large, substantial branches which spread as
wide as the tree is tall (Fig. 1). The 6 to 12-inch-long
leaves are composed of many, finely-toothed, oval
leaflets, and do not display any appreciable fall color.
Of particular interest are the 6 to 12-inch-long seed
clusters, green strings of winged seeds suspended
below the branches which turn brown and fall in
autumn. The tree grows at a phenomenal rate. A sixyear-old tree in Raliegh was about 25 feet tall and
wide with a 14-inch trunk diameter. The trunk can
reportedly grow to at least eight feet in diameter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pterocarya stenoptera
Pronunciation: teer-oh-KAIR-ee-uh sten-OP-ter-uh
Common name(s): Chinese Wingnut
Family: Juglandaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: shade tree; residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 70 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-533, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pterocarya stenoptera -- Chinese Wingnut Page 2
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pterocarya stenoptera -- Chinese Wingnut Page 3
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Wingnut.
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Chinese Wingnut may perform well as a street or
shade tree but the aggressive roots may make it
unsuitable for use in a lawn or garden. It should be
considered for broader use as an urban tree but it is
largely untested, so use it with caution. Locate it well
away from (10 feet or more) a sidewalk or driveway
so the large-diameter surface roots will not lift the
concrete or asphalt.
Prune early in the life of the tree to form a good,
strong structure by spacing major limbs several feet
apart along a central trunk. Do not allow these limbs
to grow more than about two-thirds the diameter of the
trunk to encourage formation of a strong branch collar.
Chinese Wingnut grows quickly in full sun and
moist soil, and is ideally located beside a stream or
pond. The trees are tolerant of clay, wind, drought,
and compacted soil once the trees have become well
established. Any necessary pruning should be done in
the summer to prevent the bleeding which occurs in
spring or winter.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern are
known at this time.