Fact Sheet ST-534
October 1994
Pterostyrax hispida
Figure 1. Young Fragrant Epaulette Tree.
Fragrant Epaulette Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Fragrant Epaulette Tree is a deciduous tree which
can reach 20 to 30 feet in height with an equal spread
but is more often seen smaller (Fig. 1). The three to
eight-inch-long by four-inch-wide, light green, oval
leaves have a silvery cast on their undersides, and the
leaves turn yellow or yellow-green in fall before
dropping. Of particular interest are the delicate,
creamy white, slightly fragrant blooms which appear in
early summer when few other trees are flowering.
Hanging in nine-inch-long and four-inch-diameter
clusters, these blossoms are quite striking when viewed
from below so the tree should be properly situated to
take advantage of this display, planting it on a bank
along a walkway, in a raised bed, or above a bench.
This will also allow the attractive bark to be more
easily appreciated, an inner orange/tan color showing
through the grey bark at expansion breaks. The seed
pods which follow the pendulous blooms are grey,
fuzzy, and cling to the branches throughout the winter.
They are quite showy and useful in dried flower
arrangements.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pterostyrax hispida
Pronunciation: teer-oh-STY-racks HISS-pih-duh
Common name(s): Fragrant Epaulette Tree,
Wisteria-Tree
Family: Styracaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: near a deck or patio; shade tree; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: spreading; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-534, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pterostyrax hispida -- Fragrant Epaulette Tree Page 2
Texture: coarse
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: pectinate; serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Pterostyrax hispida -- Fragrant Epaulette Tree Page 3
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The wide-spreading, upright-spreading branches
help to make this a fabulous small shade tree, casting
deep shade beneath the tree. Some early pruning may
be necessary to remove the lower branches (to allow
easier access below the tree) or to control the tree’s
shape. Seek out this little-known tree for a specimen
or group planting which is not likely to be duplicated
in the near future due to the rarity of the tree.
Fragrant Epaulette Tree should be grown in full
sun on moist, well-drained soil. It will tolerate both
acid and alkaline soils. The trees perform best when
they receive no shade, becoming thin and flowering
poorly in the shade.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.