Fact Sheet ST-536
October 1994
Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat’
Figure 1. Young ‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear.
‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear quickly grows 35 to 45
feet high and 30 to 35 feet wide, with widely-spaced,
upright-spreading, thornless branches (Fig. 1). The
more dominant trunk and open form of ‘Aristocrat’
Callery Pear helps to make it less susceptible to wind
and ice damage than ‘Bradford’. Branch angles are
wider and lateral branches grow at a slower rate than
on ‘Bradford’, therefore the branches are better
attached to the trunk. In spring before the new leaves
unfold, the tree puts on a brilliant display of pure
white flowers which, unfortunately, do not have a
pleasant fragrance. The leaves emerge as red/purple,
then become 1.5 to 3 inches long, glossy green with
wavy margins and a red blush. They turn red again in
fall before dropping. The small, pea-sized, red/brown
fruits which form are quite attractive to birds and other
wildlife, and mummify on the tree persisting for
several months to a year. Planting two or more
cultivars of Callery Pear together could increase fruit
set.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat’
Pronunciation: PIE-rus kal-ler-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): ‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; screen; shade tree; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-536, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat’ -- ‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear Page 2
Availability: generally available in many areas within
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 45 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; tan
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem; persistent
on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat’ -- ‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear Page 3
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of ‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear.
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Planted commonly as a street tree or in parking lot
islands, it is also quite suited for downtown tree pits
due to its urban tolerance. Like ‘Bradford’ pear, it is
able to tolerate small soil spaces. It looks great
located along a street on 20 to 25-foot-centers and
creates a ‘corridor’ for traffic flow.
The major problem with the ‘Bradford’ pears has
been too many upright branches growing too closely
together on the trunk which leads to branch breakage
and splitting. ‘Aristocrat’ appears to be mostly free of
this problem, but has been shown to be more
susceptible to fire blight than ‘Bradford’, particularly
in evaluations conducted in the south. Pruning the
trees early in their life to space lateral branches along
a central trunk should be all that is needed to ensure a
strong, well-structured tree. Only buy trees with wellspaced branches.
Callery Pear trees are shallow-rooted and will
tolerate most soil types including alkaline and clay, are
pollution-resistant and tolerate drought and wet soil
well. ‘Aristocrat’ is a very adaptable tree suited for
downtown and other restricted soil spaces.
Pests
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew.
Scales occasionally affect pears.
Several borers may attack pear. Keep trees
healthy to prevent attacks.
Diseases
‘Aristocrat’ pear is very susceptible to fire blight.
This disease can devastate a planting. Tips of infected
branches appear scorched and burnt. The leaves
droop, turn brown, but remain hanging on the tree.
The bacteria wash down the branch and form cankers.
Bark inside the canker often shreds and peels. When a
canker girdles a branch, that branch dies. Prune out
infected branches well below the infected area.