Fact Sheet ST-537
October 1994
Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’
Figure 1. Young ‘Bradford’ Callery Pear.
‘Bradford’ Callery Pear1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
‘Bradford’ is the original introduction of Callery
Pear and has an inferior branching habit when
compared to other cultivars which have since been
developed (Fig. 1). It has many vertical limbs with
embedded bark packed closely on the trunk and grows
about 40 feet high by 30 to 45 feet wide but the crown
is dense and the branches long and not tapered,
making it quite susceptible to wind and ice damage
and other breakage. However, it does put on a
gorgeous, early spring display of pure white blossoms,
and the small, red/brown fruits which follow will
attract quite a number of birds who find them
delicious. Fruit set may be increased by planting two
or more cultivars of Callery Pear together. Fall color
is incredible, ranging from red and orange to dark
maroon.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’
Pronunciation: PIE-rus kal-ler-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): ‘Bradford’ Callery Pear
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; screen; shade tree; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-537, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’ -- ‘Bradford’ Callery Pear Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; purple; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; tan
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’ -- ‘Bradford’ Callery Pear Page 3
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
Figure 3. Foliage of ‘Bradford’ Callery Pear.
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The major problem with the ‘Bradford’ Callery
Pear has been too many upright branches growing too
closely together on the trunk. Prune the trees early in
their life to space lateral branches along a central
trunk. This is not easy and a skilled pruning crew is
needed to build a stronger tree. Even following
pruning by a skilled crew, trees often look misshappen
with most of the lower foliage removed and the lower
portions of the multiple trunks showing. This tree
probably was not meant to be pruned, but without
pruning has a short life, thus ‘Bradford’ Pear defines a
Catch-22.
Callery Pear trees are shallow-rooted and will
tolerate most soil types including clay and alkaline, are
pest- and pollution-resistant, and tolerate soil
compaction, drought and wet soil well. ‘Bradford’ is
the most fireblight-resistant cultivar of the Callery
Pears. Unfortunately, as ‘Bradford’ and some of the
other cultivars approach 20 years old, they begin to
fall apart in ice and snow storms due to inferior, tight
branch structure. But they are certainly beautiful and
grow extremely well in urban soil until then and
probably will continue to be planted because of their
urban toughness. As you plan downtown street tree
plantings, remember that in downtown sites many
other trees succumb before this one due to a variety of
reasons, but the Callery Pears seem to hang on pretty
well despite the problems with branch attachments and
multiple trunks.
‘Autumn Blaze’ has wonderful fall color earlier
than other cultivars.
Pests
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew.
Scales can be seen on ‘Bradford’ but usually they
are not serious.
Several borers may attack pear. Keep trees
healthy to prevent attacks.
Diseases
Slightly susceptible to fireblight when grown in
the south but the damage is usually only noticed at
branch tips. ‘Bradford’ shows the best resistance to
Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’ -- ‘Bradford’ Callery Pear Page 4
fire blight in tests conducted in the southeast of all
Callery Pear cultivars tested.
Tips of fire blight-infected branches appear
scorched and burnt. The leaves droop, turn brown, but
remain hanging on the tree. The bacteria wash down
the branch and form cankers. Bark inside the canker
often shreds and peels. When a canker girdles a
branch, that branch dies. The Callery Pears are
resistant, but not immune to this disease and some
cultivars are apparently more resistant than others.
Prune out infected branches well below the infected
area.