Fact Sheet ST-538
October 1994
Pyrus calleryana ‘Redspire’
Figure 1. Young ‘Redspire’ Callery Pear.
‘Redspire’ Callery Pear1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
‘Redspire’ Callery Pear quickly grows 35 to 45
feet high and 20 feet wide, with upright-spreading,
thornless branches (Fig. 1). The narrow crown enable
this tree to be used in tight overhead spaces. The
silhouette appears as a fat column growing wider than
‘Whitehouse’ and ‘Capital’ but narrower than
‘Bradford’ and ‘Aristocrat’. In spring before the new
leaves unfold, the tree puts on a nice display of pure
white flowers larger than ‘Bradford’ or ‘Aristocrat’.
Flowering may be subdued in USDA hardiness zone
8b and it occurs at about the same time as ‘Bradford’
Callery Pear. The leaves emerge as red/purple, then
become 1.5 to 3 inches long, glossy green with wavy
margins and a red blush. They turn yellow to orange
in fall in the south putting on an attractive display
before dropping. Fall color may be subdued in the
north. The small, pea-sized, red/brown fruits which
form are quite attractive to birds and other wildlife,
and mummify on the tree persisting for several months
to a year. Planting two or more cultivars of Callery
Pear together could increase fruit set.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Pyrus calleryana ‘Redspire’
Pronunciation: PIE-rus kal-ler-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): ‘Redspire’ Callery Pear
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; screen; shade tree; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit);
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-538, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Pyrus calleryana ‘Redspire’ -- ‘Redspire’ Callery Pear Page 2
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 45 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; tan
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
Pyrus calleryana ‘Redspire’ -- ‘Redspire’ Callery Pear Page 3
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
Figure 3. Foliage of ‘Redspire’ Callery Pear.
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Planted commonly as a street tree or in parking lot
islands, it is also quite suited for downtown tree pits
due to its urban tolerance. Like ‘Bradford’ pear, it is
able to tolerate small soil spaces. It looks great
located along a street on 20 to 25-foot-centers and
creates a ‘corridor’ for traffic flow.
Fire blight susceptibility was light to moderate in
tests conducted at Auburn University. Others report
resistance to fireblight. It has a fruit set which could
create a nuisance for some. Pruning the trees early in
their life to space lateral branches along a central trunk
should help in developing a strong, well-structured
tree. Only buy trees with well-spaced branches. This
cultivar has a better form than ‘Bradford’ and is easier
to train to a strong structure.
Callery Pear trees are shallow-rooted and will
tolerate most soil types including alkaline and clay, are
pest- and pollution-resistant, and tolerate drought and
wet soil well. It is a very adaptable tree suited for
downtown and other restricted soil spaces.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew.
Scales occasionally affect pears.
Several borers may attack pear. Keep trees
healthy to prevent attacks.
Diseases
In tests conducted in Kentucky and Alabama,
‘Redspire’ Callery Pear was light to moderately
susceptible to fire blight. Tips of infected branches
appear scorched and burnt. The leaves droop, turn
brown, but remain hanging on the tree. The bacteria
wash down the branch and form cankers. Bark inside
the canker often shreds and peels. When a canker
girdles a branch, that branch dies. Prune out infected
branches well below the infected area.