Fact Sheet ST-540
October 1994
Quercus acutissima
Figure 1. Mature Sawtooth Oak.
Sawtooth Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sawtooth Oak is an attractive, large, deciduous
tree, 50 feet in height or taller with a rounded, broad,
pyramidal shape (Fig. 1). The leaves are similar to
chestnut (Castanea) and have small bristles at the
edges. New spring leaves are an attractive bright
yellow-green and fall color varies from dull yellow to
brown. Brown leaves hang onto the tree into the
winter which makes the tree unattractive to some
people. The trunk and bark of Sawtooth Oak are
gray-brown and deeply furrowed. The trunk flares out
at the base lifting sidewalks and curbing if planted in
tree lawns less than eight feet wide or too close to
walks.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus acutissima
Pronunciation: KWERK-us ack-yoo-TISS-ih-muh
Common name(s): Sawtooth Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; specimen;
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 35 to 45 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: pectinate; serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-540, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus acutissima -- Sawtooth Oak Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Quercus acutissima -- Sawtooth Oak Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Sawtooth Oak.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Sawtooth Oak prefers a well-drained, acid soil but
will adapt to most soils except highly alkaline. The
trunk remains straight and usually dominant over the
lateral branches forming a pyramidal shape in the early
years making this tree very suitable for urban planting.
Growth is rapidly adding three feet in height each year
after planting. As it ages, it grows into a broad,
rounded canopy that could make it useful as a shade
tree, street or parking lot tree or a lawn tree specimen.
It is largely untested as a street tree but deserves a
chance to show its urban adaptability. Lower branches
need to be shortened then removed early when
planting this as a street or parking lot tree since they
will droop toward the ground as the tree grows older,
requiring removal to allow for vehicular traffic. Leave
the more upright, spreading branches to create more
clearance beneath. Lower branches can be left on
trees grown in more open areas to allow for full
development of the picturesque, low branching, open
form. Multi-trunked specimens can reportedly break
up at about 25-years-old due to embedded bark and
poor attachment so maintain the central leader.
The acorns of Sawtooth Oak are large (1-inchlong) and are produced in large quantities in the fall.
They are quite popular with wildlife. The acorns may
cause a litter problem for some if the tree is located
near walkways, driveways or house gutters. But
squirrels and other wildlife love the acorns. Trees
grow best in well-drained soil in the full sun.
Irrigation helps trees become established but once
established, they grow very fast without irrigation.
This is one of the fastest growing trees in Auburn’
shade tree trials.
Propagation of Oaks by seed is the most common.
Propagate by stratifying acorns in fall. Acorns will
germinate in spring. Some seeds may germinate near
existing plants.
Pests
No pests of major concern although the potential
list is long. It is usually pest-free.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Quercus acutissima -- Sawtooth Oak Page 4
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large trees
tolerate some feeding injury without harm. Trees
repeatedly attacked, or having some other problem,
may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form nests in
trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be pruned out
when small. Where they occur, gypsy moth
caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks. Fall
cankerworm has been a problem in some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Lace bugs occasionally suck juices from leaves
causing them to look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, the upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern although the list
of potential problems is long. Usually this oak is
disease-free.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it
usually does not need to be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth and is generally harmless.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.
Chlorosis due to micronutrient-deficiency occurs
on high pH soil.