Fact Sheet ST-548
October 1994
Quercus imbricaria
Figure 1. Middle-aged Shingle Oak.
Shingle Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This stately, deciduous, native tree grows 40 to 60
feet tall (occasionally 80 to 100 feet) with an equal or
greater spread, its broad, strong branches casting
medium to deep shade below the rounded canopy (Fig.
1). The smooth, four to six-inch-long by one to twoinch-wide leaves start out life with a red to yellow
cast, deepen to a rich green through the summer, then
turn shades of yellow and rust again in the fall before
dropping. Some leaves will persist on the tree
throughout the winter. In May or early June the
flowers appear as drooping yellowish-green catkins
and are followed by the production of one-half to oneinch-long, dark brown acorns.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus imbricaria
Pronunciation: KWERK-us im-brih-KAIR-ee-uh
Common name(s): Shingle Oak, Northern Laurel
Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-548, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus imbricaria -- Shingle Oak Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: sinuate; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red; yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Quercus imbricaria -- Shingle Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Shingle Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The wood of Shingle Oak is extremely durable
and was used in pioneer days for split shingles. This
strong, resilient nature of Shingle Oak and its
pyramidal shape when young help to make it suited to
use as a screen, or a durable street or specimen tree
which is unlikely to be damaged by harsh winds or
snow-loads. It can be planted along residential streets,
but there are more adaptable trees for downtown areas.
Naturally found along streams or river banks,
Shingle Oak should be grown in full sun and prefers
moist but well-drained, acid soils though it will adapt
to moderately drier conditions and slightly alkaline
soil. It is tolerant of wet sites once established. Fieldgrown trees should be transplanted in springtime for
best survival.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Some pests of this oak are borer, variable Oak and
Oak slug caterpillar although natural enemies usually
provide control.
Diseases
Twig gall leaf miner and powdery mildew are
common diseases fo this tree. Shingle Oak is also
susceptible to oak wilt.