Fact Sheet ST-553
October 1994
Quercus nigra
Figure 1. Young Water Oak.
Water Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Water Oak has a spreading, rounded, open canopy,
and is most often used for a naturalized landscape
(Fig. 1). The acorns are particularly abundant on
Water Oak and make good food for wildlife. They
badly stain asphalt and concrete for several months in
fall and winter. The leaves vary tremendously, from
rounded and entire to three-lobed with several bristle
tips but are most frequently spatulate. Water Oak is
deciduous in the North, semi-evergreen in the Deep
South, and trees reach 60 to 80 feet in height (shorter
when grown in the open) with a 50 to 70-foot spread.
Some trees put on a wonderful yellow fall color show
for about a week.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus nigra
Pronunciation: KWERK-us NYE-gruh
Common name(s): Water Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
reclamation plant; shade tree; residential street tree;
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 60 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-553, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus nigra -- Water Oak Page 2
or less identical crown forms
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; entire
Leaf shape: linear; obovate; spatulate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.63
Quercus nigra -- Water Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Water Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Easily transplanted, young trees should be trained
to develop a central trunk and then will require only
occasional pruning once established. Naturalized trees
often develop with several upright multiple trunks
which are poorly attached to the tree. Horizontal
branches droop toward the ground as additional growth
adds to their weight. They can split from the tree in
wind storms, deforming the plant and beginning the
process of decay and decline. They appear to be poor
compartmentalizers of decay since many are hollow at
40 years old.
A rapid-grower, Water Oak has a relatively short
life span of only 30 to 50 years, particularly in the east
on good sites where growth is rapid. Perhaps more
durable and not as weak-wooded in drier areas such as
Texas and Oklahoma where growth is slower. The
tree often begins to break apart just as it grows to a
desirable size. For this reason, Live, Bur, Shumard,
Red, White, Swamp White Oak and others are much
better choices. Like other Oaks, care must be taken to
develop a strong branch structure early in the life of
the tree. This might increase the life span by
eliminating the need for removing large-diameter
branches. Pruning large branches from the trunk often
initiates decay in the trunk.
A North American native, Water Oak is adapted to
wet, swampy areas, such as along ponds and stream
banks, but can also tolerate other well-drained sites
and even heavy, compacted soils. Not adapted to
highly alkaline soil but will grow well in clay.
Propagation is by seed or hardwood cuttings.
Propagation of Oaks by seed is the most common
method, but horticulturists are developing techniques
for vegetative propagation.
Pests
No pests are normally serious.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees, particularly those with root damage
resulting from construction activities. Newly planted
young trees may also be attacked. Keep trees as
healthy as possible with regular fertilization and water
during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large trees
tolerate some feeding injury without harm. Trees
Quercus nigra -- Water Oak Page 4
repeatedly attacked, or having some other problem,
may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form nests in
trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be pruned out
when small. Where they occur, gypsy moth
caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks. Fall
cankerworm has been a problem in some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Diseases
Except for oak wilt, no diseases are normally
serious.
Mushroom root rot and trunk decay can be
serious.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it does
not need to be treated. Infection in the Deep South
can be severe and can cause usually significant
defoliation. Repeated heavy defoliations can weaken
trees and make them more sensitive to other stresses.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.
Chlorosis due to iron-deficiency occurs on very
high pH soil.