Fact Sheet ST-563
October 1994
Quercus texana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Texas Red Oak.
Texas Red Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Growing up to 80 feet tall with a 50 to 60-foot
spread, Texas Red Oak forms a stately tree with a
narrow, rather dense rounded canopy (Fig. 1). This
oak is similar to the Shumard Oak. The crown spreads
with age becoming round at maturity. The four to
eight-inch-long deciduous leaves are deeply-lobed
(more so than Quercus rubra) and have bristles on the
tips of some lobes. A lovely dark green during most
of the year, Texas Red Oak puts on a vivid display of
brilliant red to red-orange fall and winter foliage,
providing a dramatic landscape statement. Fall and
winter coloration varies from year to year in USDA
hardiness zones 8 and 9. During the winter the bare
tree provides interesting branching patterns. The 1.5-
inch-wide acorns are surrounded by a shallow,
enclosing cup and are popular with wildlife.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus texana
Pronunciation: KWERK-us teck-SAY-nuh
Common name(s): Texas Red Oak, Texas Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; specimen; residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 75 feet
Spread: 25 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-563, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus texana -- Texas Red Oak Page 2
Crown shape: oval; round
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Quercus texana -- Texas Red Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Texas Red Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Texas Red Oak has become popular in some areas
but is utilized sparingly in others. It deserves wider
use in most parts of its range due to urban
adaptability. Planted on 30 to 40-foot-centers, it will
form a closed canopy over a two-lane street in 20 to
25-years with good growing conditions.
It makes a good street tree after some initial
pruning to develop a central leader. Several leaders
often develop in the nursery and when they are
removed to develop one leader, the tree often looks
very open and bare. Although this may be somewhat
undesirable from an aesthetic standpoint, it creates a
stronger tree which will provide a much longer service
life than a multiple-leadered tree. The tree "fills in" as
it grows older, forming a coarsely-branched, open
interior. Once trained into a central leader this tree
will require less pruning than Live Oak or Pin Oak,
and may, therefore, require less maintenance as an
urban tree. But it will not live as long as Live Oak.
Branches are more upright and will not grow down
toward the ground as will Live, Water and Laurel Oak.
Like other oaks, care must be taken to develop a
strong branch structure early in the life of the tree. Be
sure that main branches remain less than about half the
diameter of the trunk to ensure proper development
and longevity in the landscape. Be sure that these are
removed periodically so that only one trunk remains.
A native of Central Texas on alkaline and slightly
acidic soil, Texas Red Oak grows well in full sun on a
wide variety of soils. Although it prefers moist, rich
soil where it will grow rapidly, it will tolerate drier
locations. It is highly stress-tolerant and will endure
urban conditions quite well, including high pH soil. It
appears to be well-adapted to clay soil, even those
which are poorly drained.
Mites and occasionally root rot on prolonged wet
soil are the major pests. Oak wilt will kill Texas Red
Oak and is of particular concern in Texas.
Pests
Usually no pests are serious.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Quercus texana -- Texas Red Oak Page 4
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large trees
tolerate some feeding injury without harm. Trees
repeatedly attacked, or having some other problem,
may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form nests in
trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be pruned out
when small. Where they occur, gypsy moth
caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Diseases
Usually no diseases are serious.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it does
not need to be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth.
Oak wilt is a fatal disease beginning with a slight
crinkling and paling of the leaves. This is followed by
leaf wilting and browning of leaf margins then
working inward. The symptoms move down branches
toward the center of the tree. Cut down and destroy
infected trees. The disease may be spread by insects
or pruning tools. The disease appears to infect Red,
Black and Live Oaks particularly. Avoid pruning in
late spring and early summer in areas where Oak wilt
is present. Dormant or summer pruning is best.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.