Fact Sheet ST-544
October 1994
Quercus cerris
Figure 1. Middle-aged Turkey Oak.
Turkey Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Turkey Oak is a fast-growing deciduous tree
capable of reaching 130 feet in height, but mostly seen
at 30 to 50 feet tall and wide (Fig. 1). The 2.5 to 5-
inch-long leaves are covered with a fine fuzz on both
upper and lower surfaces. The one-inch-long acorns
are set into big, woolly cups, and ripen in October.
They germinate readily in a moist landscape. The
attractive, ridged and furrowed bark reveals an orange
color within its fissures. The trunk can grow to at
least three or four feet in diameter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus cerris
Pronunciation: KWERK-us SAIR-iss
Common name(s): Turkey Oak, Moss-Cupped Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 50 feet
Spread: 30 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-544, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus cerris -- Turkey Oak Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; dentate
Leaf shape: oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: brown; yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Quercus cerris -- Turkey Oak Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Turkey Oak.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Older specimens often develop a wide-spreading,
multi-trunked form making it a great tree for climbing
or for use as a specimen. Young specimens are
observed growing with a straight central leader with
well-spaced major branches. This should be a very
durable landscape tree in the south.
Turkey Oak should be grown in full sun or partial
shade but tolerates almost any soil except wet ones. It
grows well on sandy ridges and is salt-tolerant.
Surprisingly, this tree is not grown in the trade and is
not available. But its extreme drought tolerance,
ability to thrive in poor, clay soil and attractive habit
make it most worthy of use in urban areas. It might
make a good street tree for southern cities.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.