Fact Sheet ST-557
October 1994
Quercus prinus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Chestnut Oak.
Chestnut Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chestnut Oak is a deciduous, native tree which
reaches 50 to 60 feet in height with an equal spread
when grown in the open (Fig. 1). It is capable of
reaching to 100 feet in the woods. The glossy, green,
four to eight-inch-long by 1.5 to 3-inch-wide leaves
turn to yellow-brown or red-brown in fall before
dropping. The large, 1.5-inch-long acorns which fall
in October are particularly sweet-tasting, and are
relished by many forms of wildlife, such as the grey
squirrel, black bear, and white-tailed deer. The
attractive dark brown to black bark is deeply ridged
and furrowed.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus prinus
Pronunciation: KWERK-us PRY-nus
Common name(s): Chestnut Oak, Rock Oak, Basket
Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-557, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus prinus -- Chestnut Oak Page 2
Crown density: dense
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; undulate
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.66
Quercus prinus -- Chestnut Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Chestnut Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Chestnut Oak has been used for planting in
parking lots and could be tested and used more for
planting along streets and as a shade tree. The crown
is dominated by one central trunk with lateral branches
developing good attachments wiwth little pruning. Be
sure to allow plenty of room for trunk expansion and
root flare since this Oak grows quite large.
Chestnut Oak is naturally found on poor, dry,
sandy or rocky landscapes. Well adapted to planting
along highway roadsides or in other areas were there
will be no maintenance but not suited for clay soil or
poorly-drained sites. The wood is very durable and
hard.
Quercus michauxii (Swamp Chestnut Oak), a
closely related species, is lumped together by some
botanists with Quercus prinus although they look quite
different. Swamp Chestnut Oak grows taller, with
platey, light grey bark and has similar cultural
requirements.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern other than
gypsy moth. Variable Oak and Oak slug caterpillars
can infest the tree although natural enemies usually
provide control. Fall cankerworm has been a problem
in some years. There are many other potential
problems, although none serious.
Chestnut Oak is susceptible to oak wilt.