Fact Sheet ST-556
October 1994
Quercus phellos
Figure 1. Middle-aged Willow Oak.
Willow Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Widely used as a shade tree, in parks, and to line
streets and boulevards, the fast-growing Willow Oak
can reach over 70 feet in height with more than a 40
to 50 foot spread (Fig. 1). The pyramidal shape in
youth gives way to a rounded canopy in middle and
old age, with lower branches drooping toward the
ground. The long, light green willow-like leaves
create dense shade and a graceful effect turning bright
yellow before they fall. The tree is easy to transplant
but reportedly transplants poorly in the fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus phellos
Pronunciation: KWERK-us FELL-oase
Common name(s): Willow Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree;
tree has been successfully grown in urban areas where
air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 75 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-556, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus phellos -- Willow Oak Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate; oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.69
Quercus phellos -- Willow Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Willow Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The city of Charlotte and other southern cities
planted Willow Oak extensively during this century
and it has proven to be an excellent street tree. Prune
to space large branches along the trunk so they are
well-attached to the tree. Willow Oak forms a tight,
compact head with most of the foliage on the outside
of the crown. Open-grown trees would benefit from
some pruning to thin the crown to develop more
secondary branches along the major limbs and increase
the taper on major limbs. This would improve the
already good wind-hardiness of Willow Oak. But
pruning is difficult as there are many short, spine-like
twigs which are a nuisance to tree climbers. Be sure
to prune out double leaders as they form, early in the
life of the tree to help create a strong form.
It grows in low, bottomland wet sites of flood
plains yet is drought-tolerant. It thrives in constantly
wet to moist soil, although it has been known to adapt
to seemingly impossible habitats. Willow Oak is a
tough tree well adapted to urban conditions, but can
develop chlorosis of high pH soils so be sure to plant
on only acid or neutral soil. Willow Oak has no major
problems and tolerates clay, salt, poor drainage and
compacted soil.
Root rot can be a problem in confined urban areas.
Pests
No pests are serious, but mites or scale can
become troublesome.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large trees
tolerate some feeding injury without harm. Trees
repeatedly attacked, or having some other problem,
may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form nests in
trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be pruned out
when small. Where they occur, gypsy moth
caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks. Fall
cankerworm has been a problem in some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Quercus phellos -- Willow Oak Page 4
Spider mite infested leaves first look dusty then
yellowed. They can occasionally become serious on
selected trees.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Diseases
Usually no diseases are serious.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it does
not need to be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.
Chlorosis due to iron-deficiency occurs on high
pH soil.