Fact Sheet ST-564
October 1994
Quercus virginiana
Figure 1. Mature Southern Live Oak.
Southern Live Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A large, sprawling, picturesque tree, usually
graced with Spanish moss and strongly reminiscent of
the Old South, Live Oak is one of the broadest
spreading of the Oaks, providing large areas of deep,
inviting shade (Fig. 1). It is the state tree of Georgia.
Reaching 40 to 60 feet in height with a 60 to 100 foot
spread and usually possessing many sinuously curved
trunks and branches, Live Oak is an impressive sight
for any large-scale landscape. An amazingly durable
American native, it can measure its lifetime in
centuries if properly located and cared for in the
landscape. It makes an excellent street tree in the
South. Unfortunately, Oak wilt has devastated the tree
in parts of central Texas. Give it plenty of room since
the trunk can grow to more than six feet in diameter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus virginiana
Pronunciation: KWERK-us ver-jin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Southern Live Oak, Live Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 10B (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; specimen; residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 60 to 120 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-564, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus virginiana -- Southern Live Oak Page 2
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); linear
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen;
semievergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.88
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Quercus virginiana -- Southern Live Oak Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Southern Live Oak.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Once established, Live Oak will thrive in almost
any location and has very good wind resistance. Live
Oak is a tough, enduring tree that will respond with
vigorous growth to plentiful moisture on well-drained
soil. Like other Oaks, care must be taken to develop a
strong branch structure early in the life of the tree. Be
sure to eliminate multiple trunks and branches which
form a narrow angle with the trunk as these are likely
to split from the tree as it grows older.
Be sure that adequate soil space is given to Live
Oak. Although roots will grow under curbs and
sidewalks when planted in confined soil spaces
allowing the tree to thrive in urban sites, in time, they
lift sidewalks, curbs and driveways. This may be a
small price to pay for the bountiful shade cast by a
row of healthy trees.
One of the biggest problems with Live Oak in our
cities is the lack of pruning. Therefore, it is not a
plant-and-forget tree. Because this tree can live for
such a long time, it is very important to develop
proper trunk and branch structure early in the life of
the tree. Following planting in the nursery, prune the
tree each year for the first three years, then every five
years to age 30. This program will help ensure that
the tree develops into a strong, long-lived fixture in
the community, and will help develop the 14 to 15
foot tall vehicle clearance needed for planting along
city streets.
Best growth is made in moist, acid soil, sand,
loam or clay, but the tree is amazingly adapted to
drought. It also tolerates alkaline soil well. Young
trees grow three feet each year and the trunk adds
about one-inch in diameter under nursery conditions.
Construction-impacted trees take a long time to die,
giving Live Oak a reputation for being a tough tree. It
is usually the last tree to die around a newly
constructed building.
Sand Live Oak, Quercus virginiana var. geminata
(Q. geminata), grows on sandy soil, is more upright
and open-crowned in habit, has thick revolute leaves
and acorns produced in pairs. It may be more suited
for street tree planting due to the smaller size. Leaves
emerge about four weeks after Live Oak and Sand
Live Oak suckers more than Live Oak. The fastgrowing variety ‘Heritage’ is recommended for desert
areas, and is more common in the southwestern United
States. Quercus fusiformis is native to central and
southern Texas, is susceptible to Oak wilt but resistant
to root rot. Perhaps more adapted to Texas than
Quercus virginiana but nursery operators do not
normally differentiate among the Live Oaks.
Pests
It is usually pest-free. Occasionally mites infest
the foliage, but they are of little concern in the
landscape.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Quercus virginiana -- Southern Live Oak Page 4
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Diseases
It is usually disease-free except for Oak wilt in
parts of Texas and perhaps some other isolated areas.
Oak wilt is a fatal disease beginning with a slight
crinkling and paling of the leaves. This is followed by
leaf wilting and browning of leaf margins then
working inward. The symptoms move down branches
toward the center of the tree. Cut down and destroy
infected trees. The disease may be spread by insects,
pruning tools or transporting infected wood to
uninfected areas. The disease appears to infect Red,
Black and Live Oaks particularly. Common practice
in Texas where Oak wilt is most prevalent is to
immediately paint pruning cuts on Live Oak with
pruning paint to help prevent the insect vector from
coming to the tree. Avoid pruning in midspring to
early summer in areas where Oak wilt is present.
Dormant or summer pruning is best.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with fugal growth
resembling white powder.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.