Fact Sheet ST-558
October 1994
Quercus robur
Figure 1. Mature English Oak.
English Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A stately and very unique oak that will reach a
height and spread of 50 to 60 feet, English Oak is
hardy in USDA hardiness zone 5 and will tolerate a
range of soil pH and moisture conditions, including
occasionally wet soil and dry clay (Fig. 1). The crown
often appears open with large branches dominating the
round crown. It is low branching and pyramidal
(when young) with a short, grey trunk. The main
trunk is normally straight up or slightly bent up
through the center of the crown. Branches develop
nicely and the tree typically requires little if any
pruning to create good form and strong structure. An
under-utilized street and shade tree in drier climates.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus robur
Pronunciation: KWERK-us ROE-ber
Common name(s): English Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; cleft
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-558, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus robur -- English Oak Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Quercus robur -- English Oak Page 3
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Figure 3. Foliage of English Oak.
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although not widely-used in the United States, the
tree appears to be very drought-tolerant and could be
used more extensively, particularly in climates such as
west Texas with low humidity where powdery mildew
may not be a big problem. It also grows well in a
wide range of soil from acid to alkaline.
There are a number of cultivars for leaf color and
crown form. The most popular is ‘Fastigiata’ which is
distinctly upright or columnar, but varies in spread
from 10 to 18 feet due to seedling variation. Leaves
turn brown in the fall and persist into the winter. The
tree is very tolerant of urban conditions and should be
grown and used more often. Powdery mildew is often
seen on much of the tree. The cultivar ‘Attention’ has
a narrow crown and may be resistant to powdery
mildew.
Generally pest free although mites can be seen on
some trees. Powdery mildew can be a serious problem
on English Oak in humid areas.
Pests
No pests are normally serious.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars including gypsy moth feed on
Oak. Large trees tolerate some feeding injury without
harm. Trees repeatedly attacked, or having some other
problem, may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form
nests in trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be
pruned out when small. Where they occur, gypsy
moth caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks.
Fall cankerworm has been a problem in some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Spider mite infested leaves first look dusty then
yellowed, particularly on English Oak.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Quercus robur -- English Oak Page 4
Diseases
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth and can be a big problem on English Oak.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it does
not need to be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.