Fact Sheet ST-554
October 1994
Quercus nuttallii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Nuttall Oak.
Nuttall Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American deciduous tree is
capable of reaching 100 to 120 feet in height but is
more often seen at 60 to 80 feet (Fig. 1). The dull,
dark green, lobed leaves are four to eight inches long
and two to five inches wide. The small, reddishbrown acorns are 0.75 to 1.25 inches long. The bark
is dark, grey/brown, and divided into broad, flat plates.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus nuttallii
Pronunciation: KWERK-us nuh-TALL-ee-eye
Common name(s): Nuttall Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; specimen;
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-554, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus nuttallii -- Nuttall Oak Page 2
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Quercus nuttallii -- Nuttall Oak Page 3
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
Figure 3. Foliage of Nuttall Oak.
susceptible
Pest resistance: unknown
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Nuttall Oak should be grown in full sun on any
soil and is very tolerant of poorly-drained, wet sites.
This should make it well suited for the soil conditions
found at many urban sites. If landscape nurseries
grew this tree more often, it would be specified for
poorly-drained urban and suburban landscape sites.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.