Fact Sheet ST-551
October 1994
Quercus macrocarpa
Figure 1. Mature Bur Oak.
Bur Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Bur Oak is a huge tree reaching a height and
spread of 70 to 90 feet and has an impressive crown,
massive trunk, and stout branches (Fig. 1). There is a
specimen in Philadelphia which is about seven feet in
diameter and over 90 feet wide. Bark is an unusual
light brown to grey depending on the specimen, and is
deeply furrowed on older trees. Young stems have
corky ridges making them appear stout. Acorns are
almost completely covered with a furry, bur-like cap
and are large, creating a sizeable clean-up job in a
maintained landscape. Young trees have an attractive,
symmetrical, dense crown and they are well-suited for
street tree planting. Architects like the tree due to its
uniformity in crown shape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus macrocarpa
Pronunciation: KWERK-us mack-roe-KAR-puh
Common name(s): Bur Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; specimen;
residential street tree; tree has been successfully grown
in urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 70 to 90 feet
Spread: 60 to 80 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; undulate
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-551, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus macrocarpa -- Bur Oak Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: copper; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.64
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Quercus macrocarpa -- Bur Oak Page 3
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
Figure 3. Foliage of Bur Oak.
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trees are well-suited for street, park and parking
lot planting but enough soil space should be available
to accommodate growth. This large Oak should not be
planted in tree lawn strips less than 10 feet wide.
However, if soil is not compacted, roots usually stay
below the soil surface and do not lift sidewalks or
curbs.
This Oak will adapt to various soils where other
Oaks sometimes fail but is difficult to transplant from
well-drained soil due to the tap root. As with most
trees grown in urban areas, the tap root becomes much
less prominent as the tree grows older, giving way to a
more shallow, horizontal root system. It is welladapted to alkaline soils, poor drainage, high clay
content, and is very drought-tolerant.
Propagation of Oaks by seed is the most common.
Pests
No pests are normally serious.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars (including gypsy moth) feed on
Oak. Large trees tolerate some feeding injury without
harm. Trees repeatedly attacked, or having some other
problem, may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form
nests in trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be
pruned out when small. Where they occur, gypsy
moth caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs. Fall cankerworm
has been a problem in some years.
Spider mite infested leaves first look dusty then
yellowed.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Quercus macrocarpa -- Bur Oak Page 4
Diseases
No diseases are normally serious. Bur Oal is more
or less resistant to oak wilt.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it does
not need to be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.