Fact Sheet ST-555
October 1994
Quercus palustris
Figure 1. Young Pin Oak.
Pin Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Pin Oak is one of the most utilized (perhaps
overused) Oaks in the midwest and eastern United
States (Fig. 1). Popular due to the attractive pyramidal
shape and straight, dominant trunk, even on older
specimens, it exhibits chlorosis on high pH and
limestone soils because of iron-deficiency and so is not
highly recommended for these sites. Green, glossy
leaves borne on relatively small-diameter branches
give way to brilliant red to bronze fall color attracting
attention in the landscape. Some brown leaves persist
on the tree into the winter providing interest to some
people. Others do not care to use Pin Oak because of
the leaf persistence characteristic.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus palustris
Pronunciation: KWERK-us pal-US-triss
Common name(s): Pin Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; shade tree; specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 75 feet
Spread: 35 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-555, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus palustris -- Pin Oak Page 2
Growth rate: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: deltoid; oblong; obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.63
Quercus palustris -- Pin Oak Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Pin Oak.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; extended
flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
When grown on an acid soil, this can be a
handsome specimen tree. The lower branches tend to
droop, middle branches are horizontal and branches in
the upper part of the crown grow upright. Lower
branches will require removal when used as a street or
parking lot tree since they tend to droop and hang on
the tree. But the persistent lower branches can be an
asset in an open lawn setting due to the picturesque
habit displayed by an open-grown Pin Oak. The trunk
is typically straight up through the crown, only
occasionally developing a double leader. Prune any
double or multiple leaders out as soon as they are
recognized with several prunings in the first 15 to 20
years after planting. The straight trunk and small,
well-attached branches make Pin Oak an extremely
safe tree to plant in urban areas.
Pin Oak develops nicely on moist, acid soils and
is tolerant of compaction, wet soil and urban
conditions. It is extremely vigorous as far south as
USDA hardiness zone 7b but may grow slowly in
USDA hardiness zone 8a. Very sensitive to soil pH
above the high 6’s. A native to stream banks and
flood plains, Pin Oak grows well in areas where water
stands for several weeks at a time. One of the
adaptive mechanisms of Pin Oak is a fibrous, shallow
root system which allows it to tolerate flooded soil
conditions. But as with any other tree, do not plant it
in standing water or allow water to stand around the
roots until the tree has become established in the
landscape. Several years are needed after transplanting
for the tree to develop this type of adaptive root
system, and subjecting it to flooding too early could
kill it. Plant trees in a slightly raised mound or bed if
soil is poorly drained.
The lower branches on the cultivars ‘Crown Right’
and ‘Sovereign’ do not grow down at a 45 degree
angle as in the species so these cultivars were thought
to be better suited than the species as street and
parking lot trees. However, graft incompatibility often
leads to trunk failure in these cultivars, so they are no
longer marketed. Trees from the upper midwest
originating on a neutral soil will probably adapt best to
urban landscapes.
Quercus palustris -- Pin Oak Page 4
Pests
No pests are normally serious. Iron chlorosis is
the most common problem for Pin Oak growing in
soils with a high pH.
Galls can be numerous in some areas but usually
do not cause a serious problem. Galls cause
homeowners much concern. There are many types and
galls can be on the leaves or twigs. Most galls are
harmless so chemical controls are not suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large trees
tolerate some feeding injury without harm. Trees
repeatedly attacked, or having some other problem,
may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form nests in
trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be pruned out
when small. Where they occur, gypsy moth
caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Diseases
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Bacterial leaf scorch causes leaf scorch, premature
browning, and gradual decline of mature Pin Oaks in
the landscape.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Oak wilt is a fatal disease beginning with a slight
crinkling and paling of the leaves. This is followed by
leaf wilting and browning of leaf margins then
working inward. The symptoms move down branches
toward the center of the tree. The disease appears to
infect Red, Black and Live Oaks particularly.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.
Severe chlorosis due to iron-deficiency occurs on
high pH soil.