Fact Sheet ST-560
October 1994
Quercus rubra
Figure 1. Mature Northern Red Oak.
Northern Red Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
An adaptable, widely planted Oak with a rapid
growth rate, Red Oak will reach a height of 60 to 70
feet and a spread of 40 to 60 feet when open-grown,
and is native to rich woodland areas where it will
grow to 90 feet tall (Fig. 1). Branches and upper
trunk are marked with long, light grey longitudinal
lines which remind some people of ski trails. Opengrown trees form a rounded crown which makes a nice
shade, park or street tree. Many communities use Red
Oak as a street tree where overhead space is not
limiting. Acorns are small and easily cleaned up,
broken into small pieces by pedestrians or eaten by
squirrels. The foliage turns a wonderful dark red in
the fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus rubra
Pronunciation: KWERK-us ROO-bruh
Common name(s): Northern Red Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 70 feet
Spread: 50 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-560, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus rubra -- Northern Red Oak Page 2
Texture: coarse
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.63
Quercus rubra -- Northern Red Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Northern Red Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trees should be trained to a central leader with
major lateral branches spaced along the trunk.
Untrained trees can develop many untapered branches
growing from the same spot on the trunk which could
become crowded on the trunk as the tree grows older.
However, the tree has been rated as a "low failure
rate" tree indicating that it stays together well in the
urban environment. It will break apart in ice storms.
Prune in the dormant season to avoid spread of Oak
wilt disease vectors.
The tree withstands city conditions well but not
high pH soils but is better in calcareous soils than Pin
or Willow Oak. Moderately drought-tolerant in most
soils, Red Oak is well-suited as a street tree and other
areas with at least fair soil. Best planted in the spring
from the field (spring, summer or fall from containers)
in full sun or part shade, Red Oak does best in welldrained soil with a pH less than 7.5. It tolerates
compacted soil, air pollution and moderate salt spray.
Like most other large-sized trees, roots can heave
sidewalks.
Red Oak is often used in furniture, for
construction timbers and for finished flooring in homes
and commercial buildings. It is one of our most
widely used hardwood species now that the supply of
White Oak has diminished.
Pests
No pests are normally serious.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars including gypsy moths feed on
Oak. Large trees tolerate some feeding injury without
harm. Trees repeatedly attacked, or having some other
problem, may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form
nests in trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be
Quercus rubra -- Northern Red Oak Page 4
pruned out when small. Where they occur, gypsy
moth caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks.
Fall cankerworm has been a problem in some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Diseases
No diseases are normally serious.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it does
not need to be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth.
Oak wilt is a fatal disease beginning with a slight
crinkling and paling of the leaves. It has caused
extensive tree death in some regions. This is followed
by leaf wilting and browning of leaf margins then
working inward. The symptoms move down branches
toward the center of the tree. Cut down and destroy
infected trees. The disease may be spread by insects
or pruning tools. The disease appears to infect Red,
Black and Live Oaks particularly. Avoid pruning in
late spring and early summer in areas where Oak wilt
is present. Dormant or summer pruning is best.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.
Chlorosis due to iron-deficiency occurs on soil
with a pH above 7.5.