Fact Sheet ST-541
October 1994
Quercus alba
Figure 1. Mature White Oak.
White Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
White Oak is a long-lived, slow-growing tree,
reaching 60 to 100 feet in height with a spread of 50
to 90 feet in its native bottomland soil (Fig. 1). Old
specimens can be massive, growing to be several
hundred years old. Since trunks can be six feet in
diameter leave plenty of room for this tree in the
landscape. The trunk flares out at the base lifting
sidewalks and curbing if planted in tree lawns less
than eight feet wide. The red fall color is fairly
reliable year to year and is outstanding among the
Oaks in USDA hardiness zones 8a and colder areas.
Brown leaves may be held on the tree into the early
part of the winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus alba
Pronunciation: KWERK-us AL-buh
Common name(s): White Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 100 feet
Spread: 60 to 80 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-541, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus alba -- White Oak Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.68
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Quercus alba -- White Oak Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of White Oak.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
White Oak has a stately silhouette all year long.
It is one of the best-looking Oaks in the winter due to
the light grey, platey bark and open crown. The trunk
is straight with main branches well-attached to the tree
making this a long-lived, durable tree for large, wideopen landscapes. Best to leave the area within the
drip line totally undisturbed if attempting to save an
existing tree on a construction site.
Transplant White Oak when the trees are young
since the deep-growing tap root in well-drained soil
can make transplanting very difficult. White Oak
grows in sun or partial shade and prefers an acid,
moist, well-drained soil. Unfortunately, it is not
readily available in the nursery trade. Not adapted to
dry areas. Supply new transplants with plenty of
water and mulch the area beneath the canopy to
eliminate grass competition.
Propagation of Oaks by seed is the most common,
but horticulturists are developing techniques for
vegetative propagation.
Pests
None normally serious. In spite of a long list of
pests found on the Oaks, White Oak is long-lived and
durable if given enough room to develop.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Scales of several types are usually controlled with
sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large trees
tolerate some feeding injury without harm. Trees
repeatedly attacked, or having some other problem,
may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form nests in
trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be pruned out
when small. Where they occur, gypsy moth
caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks,
especially White Oak. Fall cankerworm has been a
problem in some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Lace bugs occasionally suck juices from leaves
causing them to look dusty or whitish gray. They are
usually not serious.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Quercus alba -- White Oak Page 4
Diseases
None normally serious. In spite of a long list of
pests found on the Oaks, White Oak is long-lived and
durable if given enough room to develop.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in wet
weather. Infected leaves have dead areas following
the midrib or larger veins. These light brown blotches
may run together and, in severe cases, cause leaf drop.
Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die.
Trees defoliated several years in a row may need
spraying, to allow the tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised areas on
the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same
shape and size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas
are yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease
is most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it
usually does not need to be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth but is not a serious problem.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.
Chlorosis due to iron-deficiency occurs on high
pH soil.