Fact Sheet ST-546
October 1994
Quercus falcata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Southern Red Oak.
Southern Red Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Southern Red Oak is an excellent large, durable
shade tree which reaches 60 to 80 feet in height with a
large, rounded canopy when it is open-grown (Fig. 1).
The deciduous, shiny green leaves are five to nine
inches long by four to five inches wide, with the
terminal lobe much longer and narrower than the
others. Leaves fall brown over an extended period of
time in fall and winter. Some defoliation is noted
during the summer in droughty years, but this is
probably a drought-avoidance mechanism. No
permanent damage appears to come from this. The
dark brown to black bark is ridged and furrowed and
resembles Cherry bark, to some extent. The half-inchdiameter acorns are popular with wildlife. The trunk
normally grows straight with major branches wellspaced and strongly attached to the tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus falcata
Pronunciation: KWERK-us fal-KAY-tuh
Common name(s): Southern Red Oak, Spanish Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen;
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 60 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-546, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus falcata -- Southern Red Oak Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 8 to 12 inches; 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.59
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Quercus falcata -- Southern Red Oak Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Southern Red Oak.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Naturally found on poor upland soils, Southern
Red Oak should be grown in full sun on well-drained
soil, acid, sandy or loam (not clay). It is common on
poor-quality, sandy ridges. It is well suited for planting
in areas such as along roadsides where there is little
maintenance after planting. The wood is used for
furniture but does not have the quality of Quercus
rubra.
Variety pagodifolia, Cherrybark Oak, is adaptable,
growing along stream banks and ridge tops throughout
its range. It may be more commonly available than
the species and may be referred to as Quercus
pagodifolia in some nurseries. This plant may also be
referred to as Quercus pagoda.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
There is a large number of potential problems.
Except for oak wilt though, usually no pests or
diseases of major concern. Caterpillars can defoliate
trees. Fall cankerworm has been a problem in some
years.