Fact Sheet ST-542
October 1994
Quercus austrina
Figure 1. Middle-aged Bluff Oak.
Bluff Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This North American native oak reaches 30 to 80
feet in height and makes an attractive shade tree, with
handsome scaly gray bark (Fig. 1). The green, lobed
leaves are deciduous but do not change color before
dropping in fall. The insignificant, green, spring
flowers are followed by small acorns, less than oneinch-long. The trunk often grows straight up through
the crown with little pruning, and branches are well
spaced along the trunk. This is one of the oaks which
is not currently available in most nurseries, but it
should be. Urban tree managers will want this oak
once they find out about it.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus austrina
Pronunciation: KWERK-us oss-TRY-nuh
Common name(s): Bluff Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-542, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus austrina -- Bluff Oak Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; entire
Leaf shape: obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; orange; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Quercus austrina -- Bluff Oak Page 3
Current year twig thickness: medium
Figure 3. Foliage of Bluff Oak.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It would be well suited for planting in parking lots
or along streets and boulevards where there is plenty
of space for crown development. A row of Bluff Oaks
planted on 30 foot centers lining each side of a street
make a wonderful site. The medium-textured leaves
make this oak stand out from other oaks. Upright to
horizontal branching habit make this an easy tree to
prune for vehicular clearance beneath the canopy.
Bluff Oak should be grown in full sun on welldrained soil, and has good drought-tolerance.
Quercus durandii var. austrina is a synonym.
Propagation is by seed.
Pest and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.