Fact Sheet ST-562
October 1994
Quercus stellata
Figure 1. Mature Post Oak.
Post Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This 40 to 50-foot-tall deciduous tree creates a
dense, rounded canopy of spreading, twisted branches,
but is not cultivated in nurseries (Fig. 1). The four to
six-inch-long by three to four-inch-wide, shiny, dark
green leaves are deeply lobed and appear somewhat in
the shape of a Maltese cross. Only rarely do the
leaves change to a golden brown in the fall before
dropping. The one-half to one-inch-long acorns are
quite popular with squirrels and other wildlife. Old
trees growing on good soil form a wonderful silhouette
in the winter, with large-diameter, curving branches
growing from a sinuous trunk.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus stellata
Pronunciation: KWERK-us stell-AY-tuh
Common name(s): Post Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
reclamation plant; shade tree; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-562, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus stellata -- Post Oak Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.67
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Quercus stellata -- Post Oak Page 3
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
Figure 3. Foliage of Post Oak.
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Most often found on dry, low-fertility, sandy soils,
Post Oak is extremely drought-tolerant. Trees should
be located in full sun. Native trees are very sensitive
to soil compaction, drainage changes and soil
disturbance. Do not disturb the soil beneath the
canopy on a construction site if the tree is to be saved.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern but the tree
occasionally succumbs to Chestnut blight. There are
many other potential problems on Oaks but none are
normally serious. Post Oak is susceptible to oak wilt.