Fact Sheet ST-550
October 1994
Quercus lyrata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Overcup Oak.
Overcup Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Overcup Oak grows slowly, sometimes to more
than 100 feet in height in its native habitat but is more
often seen 30 to 40 feet high and wide, forming a
rounded silhouette with an open crown, large-diameter
branches, and a twisted trunk (Fig. 1). The dark
green, leathery, lobed leaves have fuzzy, white
undersides and turn a rich brown color before dropping
in fall. The nuts or acorns which are produced are
quite popular with squirrels, turkeys, wild hogs and
deer. The rough, reddish or gray/brown bark is
attractive and is worthy of display with night-time
lighting.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus lyrata
Pronunciation: KWERK-us lye-RAY-tuh
Common name(s): Overcup Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-550, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus lyrata -- Overcup Oak Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; entire
Leaf shape: oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.63
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Quercus lyrata -- Overcup Oak Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Overcup Oak.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This oak should be grown with a single trunk and
a few widely-spaced branches to mimic its growth
habit in the wild. The first permanent branch can be
located three to five feet from the ground if the tree
will be planted in an open lawn area and allowed to
develop a wide crown. For those planted as street
trees or in areas requiring clearance for vehicles or
pedestrians, the first permanent branch should be
higher on the trunk. The interior portion of the crown
often cleans itself of small branches, displaying the
nice branch arrangement common on most specimens.
Overcup Oak should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on almost any soil, tolerating wet, poorly
drained sites or acid, sandy soils. It would be well
suited for planting in poorly-drained urban sites, but is
not normally available at landscape nurseries.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.