Fact Sheet ST-549
October 1994
Quercus laurifolia
Figure 1. Middle-aged Diamond Leaf Oak.
Diamond Leaf Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A large, fast-growing, shade tree, Laurel Oak is
native to the southeastern United States and noted for
its dense, oval canopy (Fig. 1). Some botanists
separate this species from Q. hemisphaerica, others
lump them together - take your pick. Quercus
laurifolia has been described as tolerant of wet sites.
Quercus hemisphaerica is more of an upland species.
Laurel Oaks are taller than they are broad, eventually
reaching 60 feet or more in height with a 40 to 60-foot
spread. The trunk can be up to four feet in diameter
and flares out at the base lifting sidewalks and curbing
if planted in tree lawns less than eight feet wide.
Trees are either deciduous in the north or semievergreen in the south. The smooth, narrow leaves are
shiny on both sides and the round acorns are set 1/4 or
less of their height into thin, saucer-like cups. They
normally drop brown in the fall and winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus laurifolia
Pronunciation: KWERK-us lar-ih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Diamond Leaf Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 70 feet
Spread: 35 to 45 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-549, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus laurifolia -- Diamond Leaf Oak Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; parted
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblanceolate; obovate;
rhomboid
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous;
semievergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.63
Quercus laurifolia -- Diamond Leaf Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Diamond Leaf Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Laurel Oaks have a life span of 50 to 70 years.
Tree trunks and large branches often hollow from
decay and wood rot. The smallest trunk injury or
improper pruning cut can result in columns of decay
inside the trunk which are 10, 20 or more feet long.
Live Oak, and other Oaks are more resistant to decay
and live longer. Like other Oaks, care must be taken
to develop a strong branch structure with major
branches well-spaced along the trunk early in the life
of the tree. It grows well as a street tree and will
serve the community well, but hollows with age as it
approaches 50 years old. There are more durable
street and parking lot trees including Live, Shumard,
Pin, Southern Red, Northern Red, Bluff and Bur Oak.
Trees should be pruned to one central trunk with
major branches trimmed to keep branch diameter less
than half the trunk diameter. Major branches should
also be spaced two to three feet apart along the trunk.
Avoid removing large-diameter branches by pruning
regularly so only small branches are removed. This
strategy may increase the life span of Laurel Oak.
Laurel Oaks will grow easily in full sun or partial
shade and are quite tolerant of a wide range of soils,
from moist and rich to dry and sandy. Trees growing
under drier conditions will grow more slowly and, it is
thought, will have stronger wood which is less
susceptible to breakage. In soils with pH above 7,
chlorosis often appears.
Propagation is by seed or hardwood cuttings.
Propagation of Quercus by seed is the most common,
but horticulturists are developing techniques for
vegetative propagation.
Some nurseries market ‘Darlington’ which
supposedly has a more compact growing habit. At
least some horticulturists doubt the status of this tree
as a true cultivar.
Pests
Usually none of this tree’s pests are serious.
Mites can cause leaf yellowing, but control is
usually not needed. Gall wasp can be devastating to
many trees in an area of infestation.
Galls cause homeowners much concern. There are
many types and galls can be on the leaves or twigs.
Most galls are harmless so chemical controls are not
suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Quercus laurifolia -- Diamond Leaf Oak Page 4
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees, naturallyoccurring predatory insects will often bring the aphid
population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack weakened
or stressed trees. Newly planted young trees may also
be attacked. Keep trees as healthy as possible with
regular fertilization and water during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large trees
tolerate some feeding injury without harm. Trees
repeatedly attacked, or having some other problem,
may need spraying. Tent caterpillars form nests in
trees then eat the foliage. The nests can be pruned out
when small. Where they occur, gypsy moth
caterpillars are extremely destructive on Oaks. Fall
cankerworm has been a problem in some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in the
summer. The larvae ride the twig to the ground.
Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Spider mite infested leaves first look dusty then
yellowed. They are usually only a problem in
nurseries.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing them to
look dusty or whitish gray.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves. To
identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two across
the injury. If the injury is due to leaf miner, upper
and lower leaf surfaces are separate and black insect
excrement will be seen.
Diseases
Usually none serious.
Root rot and leaf blister is common in wet years
but control is usually not warranted. Leaf blister
symptoms are round raised areas on the upper leaf
surfaces causing depressions of the same shape and
size on lower leaf surfaces. Infected areas are
yellowish-white to yellowish-brown. The disease is
most serious in wet seasons in the spring but it does
not need to be treated.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and branches.
Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out
diseased or dead branches.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots but are
usually not serious. Rake up and dispose of infected
leaves. Tubakia spp. leafspot is very troublesome in
nurseries growing Laurel Oak in containers.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white powdery
growth.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and once
inside moves upward, killing the cambium. The leaves
on infected trees are small, pale or yellowed and fall
early. There is no practical control. Healthy trees
may be more resistant than trees of low vigor.
Chlorosis due to iron-deficiency occurs on high
pH soil.