Fact Sheet ST-545
October 1994
INTRODUCTION
Able to reach a height of 75 feet and a
spread of 45 to 60 feet, Scarlet Oak is so-named
for its beautiful, red-colored fall leaves (Fig. 1).
Fairly smooth grey bark in youth roughens to a
dark brown or black on the trunk of older specimens which can be four feet in diameter. Leaves
are more deeply lobed than Quercus rubra but
otherwise the trees look very much alike. The
crown should be built like many other Oaks with a
central trunk and lateral branches well spaced at
two or three foot intervals. The rounded, spreading canopy makes the tree well-suited for planting
along streets. The trunk flares out at the base
lifting sidewalks and curbing if planted in tree
lawns less than eight feet wide.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus coccinea
Pronunciation: KWER-cuss cock-SIN-ee-ah
Common Name(s): Scarlet Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet
in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade
Quercus coccinea
Scarlet Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
Figure 1. Middle-aged Scaret Oak.
tree; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a
small number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 75 feet
Spread: 45 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have
1. This document is Fact Sheet ST-545, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural
Engineering Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32611.
Randy Heatley, Michigan State University, provided the original text on the pests and diseases of this plant.
more or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; parted
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and
other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright
and will not droop; not particularly showy; should
be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
develop a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.67
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; welldrained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately
tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to
be susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Does well as a street tree given plenty of
soil space to develop. Plant on 30 to 40-footcenters to form a canopy overhead in residential
neighborhoods. It is not for restricted soil spaces
such as downtown planting pits, although it
appears tolerant of soil compaction.
This Oak will grow on sandy soils and is
reported to exhibit less chlorosis problems than
Pin Oak but should still be grown on acidic soils.
Appears to adapt to compacted clay soil. Scarlet
Oak has a tap root on loose, well-drained soil and
is difficult to transplant; only use nursery grown
plants for transplanting, not those collected from
the wild.
Propagation of oaks by seed is the most
common, but horticulturists are developing techniques for vegetative propagation.
Pests
This tree usually has no serious pests.
Galls cause homeowners much concern.
There are many types and galls can be on the
leaves or twigs. Most galls are harmless so
chemical controls are not suggested.
Scales of several types can usually be
controlled with sprays of horticultural oil.
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of honeydew on lower leaves. On large trees,
naturally-occurring predatory insects will often
bring the aphid population under control.
Boring insects are most likely to attack
weakened or stressed trees. Newly planted young
trees may also be attacked. Keep trees as healthy
as possible with regular fertilization and water
during dry weather.
Many caterpillars feed on Oak. Large
Figure 3. Foliage of Scarlet Oak.
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak Page 3
trees tolerate some feeding injury without harm.
Trees repeatedly attacked, or having some other
problem, may need spraying. Tent caterpillars
form nests in trees then eat the foliage. The nests
can be pruned out when small. Where they occur,
gypsy moth caterpillars are extremely destructive
on Oaks. Fall cankerworm has been a problem in
some years.
Twig pruner causes twigs to drop off in
the summer. The larvae ride the twig to the
ground. Rake up and destroy fallen twigs.
Lace bugs suck juices from leaves causing
them to look dusty or whitish gray but infestation
is usually not serious.
Leaf miners cause brown areas in leaves.
To identify leaf miner injury tear the leaf in two
across the injury. If the injury is due to leaf
miner, upper and lower leaf surfaces are separate
and black insect excrement will be seen.
Diseases
Except for oak wilt, the tree has few
serious diseases.
Anthracnose may be a serious problem in
wet weather. Infected leaves have dead areas
following the midrib or larger veins. These light
brown blotches may run together and, in severe
cases, cause leaf drop. Trees of low vigor, repeatedly defoliated, may die. Trees defoliated several
years in a row may need spraying, to allow the
tree to recover.
Canker diseases attack the trunk and
branches. Keep trees healthy by regular fertilization. Prune out diseased or dead branches. The
chestnut blight fungus can cause cankers at the
base of the trunk.
Leaf blister symptoms are round raised
areas on the upper leaf surfaces causing depressions of the same shape and size on lower leaf
surfaces. Infected areas are yellowish-white to
yellowish-brown. The disease is most serious in
wet seasons in the spring but it does not need to
be treated.
A large number of fungi cause leaf spots
but are usually not serious. Rake up and dispose
of infected leaves, if you wish.
Powdery mildew coats leaves with white
powdery growth.
Shoestring root rot attacks the roots and
once inside moves upward, killing the cambium.
The leaves on infected trees are small, pale or
yellowed and fall early. There is no practical
control. Healthy trees may be more resistant than
trees of low vigor.
Chlorosis due to iron-deficiency occurs on
high pH soil.
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak Page 4