Fact Sheet ST-552
October 1994
Quercus muehlenbergii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Chinkapin Oak.
Chinkapin Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chinkapin Oak is seen at 70 to 90 feet in height
when found in the wild but is more often seen at 40 to
50 feet in height with an equal or greater spread when
grown in cultivation (Fig. 1). It grows at a moderate
rate when young but slows considerably with age,
eventually developing into a broad, rounded canopy
with strong branches. Young trees often exhibit a
straight central leader with numerous branches
originating at the same node. The yellow/green,
deciduous, lobed leaves turn shades of red, yellow,
orange and brown before dropping in fall. Veins are
distinctly prominent on the undersides of the coarsetextured leaves. The acorns which are produced are
edible.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus muehlenbergii
Pronunciation: KWERK-us mew-len-BER-jee-eye
Common name(s): Chinkapin Oak, Chestnut Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; reclamation plant; shade
tree; residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 50 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-552, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus muehlenbergii -- Chinkapin Oak Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: dentate; undulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate; oblong;
obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Quercus muehlenbergii -- Chinkapin Oak Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinkapin Oak.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Small specimens are often grown with an upright,
oval habit. Older trees develop a more open, rounded
form. This oak should be grown with a single trunk
and widely-spaced branches to mimic its growth habit
in the wild. The first permanent branch can be located
three to five feet from the ground if the tree will be
planted in an open lawn area and allowed to develop a
wide crown. For those planted as street trees or in
areas requiring clearance for vehicles or pedestrians,
the first permanent branch should be higher on the
trunk.
Chinkapin Oak should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil. It reaches its greatest size on loose,
bottomland soils and is well adapted to alkaline soils.
This is an adaptable oak which has been planted often
in the central part of the country were soils are often
clayey and alkaline. It will grow quite nicely in other
areas of the country as well.
Propagation is by seed but plants have been
considered difficult to transplant. There are a number
of root-promoting techniques developed for nursery
production which should improve the branching of the
root system, and this should improve the
transplantability of this oak.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.