Fact Sheet ST-547
October 1994
Quercus glauca
Figure 1. Middle-aged Blue Japanese Oak.
Blue Japanese Oak1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
At first glance, this plant would hardly be thought
to be an Oak (Fig. 1). Creating a very formal, dense,
round or oval shade, evergreen Blue Japanese Oak
grows slowly to 25 to 40 feet in height with a spread
of 25 to 35 feet. The new growth is often bronze- or
purple-tinted, and develops into shiny, dark green, 2.5
to 5.5-inch-long by 1 to 2.5-inch-wide, leathery leaves.
It is a very attractive tree suited for many uses.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Quercus glauca
Pronunciation: KWERK-us GLAW-kuh
Common name(s): Blue Japanese Oak, Ring-Cupped
Oak
Family: Fagaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade tree;
narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-547, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Quercus glauca -- Blue Japanese Oak Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: dentate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Quercus glauca -- Blue Japanese Oak Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Blue Japanese Oak.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Blue Japanese Oak has been used as a street and
parking lot tree in parts of the southeast for a number
of years. Was used in USDA hardiness zone 7b until
the 1983 freeze which reduced large trees to a
collection of sprouts. It appears to be tolerant of
drought and poor, clay soil including those which are
poorly-drained and grows well in tight soil spaces. Its
tight crown lends a formal feel to the landscape.
Many upright trunks and branches originate from
one point on the trunk without initial training, and this
structure could lead to a weak tree. Following initial
training and pruning to develop a central leader and
well-spaced branches, little care should be needed to
maintain this tree. It should be grown and planted
more in urban areas in the south.
Blue Japanese Oak should be grown in full sun. It
is tolerant of a wide range of soils, including heavy
clay soils.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
There is a large number of potential problems on
Oaks, but none of major concern.