Fact Sheet ST-566
October 1994
Rhamnus caroliniana
Figure 1. Young Carolina Buckthorn.
Carolina Buckthorn1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Carolina Buckthorn develops an open crown of
many slender branches and is usually seen at 12 to 15
feet in height although it is capable of reaching 40 feet
in a partially shaded location (Fig. 1). The bright
green, deciduous leaves change to a gorgeous
orange/yellow or red in autumn before dropping. The
fairly inconspicuous, early summer flowers are
greenish-white and followed by small, showy red fruits
which ripen to black in the fall when their flesh
becomes sweet and edible. Birds find the fruits
irresistible. The thin, smooth bark is gray with dark
markings. Carolina Buckthorn is quite attractive in the
landscape and is one of the first fruiting plants to show
color.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Rhamnus caroliniana
Pronunciation: RAM-nus kair-oh-lin-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Carolina Buckthorn
Family: Rhamnaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; trainable as a standard;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 15 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-566, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Rhamnus caroliniana -- Carolina Buckthorn Page 2
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; no significant litter problem; persistent
on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Rhamnus caroliniana -- Carolina Buckthorn Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Carolina Buckthorn.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Use this small tree or large shrub in a shrub
border to attract birds and for a late summer accent. It
can be planted in mass to form a thicket which should
provide food and cover for a variety of wildlife. It
might also be tried as a street tree where overhead
space is restricted by power lines.
Carolina Buckthorn should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil, acid or alkaline. It is moderately
drought-tolerant.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Susceptible to crown rust of oats. A leaf spot will
occasionally infect the tree but is of no consequence.