Fact Sheet ST-567
October 1994
Rhus chinensis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Chinese Sumac.
Chinese Sumac1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chinese Sumac forms a loose, spreading small
tree, reaching up to 25 feet in height (Fig. 1). Most
specimens only grow to about 12 to 15 feet tall. The
shiny, pinnately compound, five inches long leaves
change to a brilliant orange, red, or yellow in the fall
before dropping. The yellowish-white, summertime
flowers appear in 6 to 10-inch-long and wide, terminal
panicles and are quite showy. The hairy fruits which
follow are orange/red and mature in October.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Rhus chinensis
Pronunciation: roose chih-NEN-sis
Common name(s): Chinese Sumac
Family: Anacardiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: crenate; serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-567, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Rhus chinensis -- Chinese Sumac Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: stout; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Rhus chinensis -- Chinese Sumac Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Sumac.
Training is required to make this large shrub into a
tree. Begin by staking the main stem in the upright
position for a year or two and develop branches
beginning at two to four feet from the ground. Space
branches 8 to 12 inches apart and be sure than they
form a wide angle with the trunk. This will help
ensure that they are well attached to the tree.
Occasional pinching or heading back of the terminal
shoot will increase branching.
Place Chinese Sumac in a prominent location in
the landscape in the full sun. It is a nice tree for
planting in a low ground cover to display the
interesting trunk and branch arrangement. The finetextured foliage, showy flower display and bright fall
color combine to make this small tree suitable for
increased usage in southern landscapes.
Chinese Sumac should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil, acid or alkaline. It would be well
suited for inclusion in a low maintenance landscape
where plants receive little if any irrigation. Suckers
from the base of the trunk may have to be removed
periodically.
Propagation is by seed.
The cultivar ‘September Beauty’ has a nice shape
and provides reliable yellow-orange fall color.
Pests
Aphids suck plant juices, but they can be easily
controlled. Aphids may also be dislodged with a high
pressure water spray from the garden hose.
Scales can be partially controlled with dormant oil
applied in the spring before plants begin to grow.
Diseases
Several fungi cause cankers leading to dieback.
Fertilize to keep plants healthy and prune out infected
parts.
Fusarium wilt infects roots, causing the leaves to
droop and wilt. A light infection causes only gradual
dwarfing or yellowing and premature red leaf
coloration.
Leaf spot causes gray spots with purplish margins
that merge, giving the leaves a scorched appearance.
Various genera of powdery mildew forms a white
coating on the leaves.
Verticillium wilt causes wilting of individual
stems, followed by death of the foliage. Eventually
the entire plant dies. Prune out infected branches. Do
not replant in the same spot with sumac or other
susceptible plants.