Fact Sheet ST-568
October 1994
Rhus copallina
Figure 1. Middle-aged Shining Sumac.
Shining Sumac1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Winged Sumac is well-suited to natural and
informal landscapes where the underground runners
spread to provide dense, shrubby cover for birds and
wildlife (Fig. 1). This species is the best of the
sumacs for ornamental planting because of its lustrous
dark green foliage which turns a brilliant orange-red in
fall. The fall color display is frequently enjoyed along
interstate highways, as the plant readily colonizes these
and other disturbed sites. The tiny, greenish-yellow
flowers, borne in compact, terminal panicles, are
followed by showy red clusters of berries which persist
into the winter and attract wildlife.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Rhus copallina
Pronunciation: roose kop-al-EYE-nuh
Common name(s): Shining Sumac, Winged Sumac
Family: Anacardiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; specimen; tree has been successfully grown in
urban areas where air pollution, poor drainage,
compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 18 feet
Spread: 12 to 18 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-568, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Rhus copallina -- Shining Sumac Page 2
Fall color: orange; red
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Rhus copallina -- Shining Sumac Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Shining Sumac.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Winged Sumac grows well on dry, sandy soils in
full sun to part shade and requires little care. It is best
used as a component of a shrub border, where its
deciduous habit adds interest to an evergreen
landscape. This makes a good roadside plant due to
its drought tolerance and seasonal interest. It has not
been widely used as a specimen or small tree but with
some trianing and pruning makes a nice small tree
located in a groundcover or near the deck or patio in a
home landscape. Seasonal pruning would be needed
to eliminate suckers and root sprouts.
Propagation is by division of the suckers.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Aphids suck plant juices. Aphids may be
dislodged with a high pressure water spray from the
garden hose.
Scales can usually be controlled with horticultural
oil.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.
Several fungi cause cankers leading to dieback.
Fertilize to keep plants healthy and prune out infected
parts.
Fusarium wilt infects roots, causing the leaves to
droop and wilt. A light infection causes only gradual
dwarfing or yellowing and premature red leaf
coloration.
A leaf spot causes gray spots with purplish
margins that merge, giving the leaves a scorched
appearance.
Various genera of powdery mildew-forming fungi
form a white coating on the leaves.
Verticillium wilt causes wilting of individual
stems, followed by death of the foliage. Eventually
the entire plant dies. Prune out infected branches. Do
not replant in the same spot with sumac or other
susceptible plants.