Fact Sheet ST-569
October 1994
Rhus lanceolata
Figure 1. Young Texan Sumac.
Texan Sumac1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Texan Sumac forms a loose, spreading small tree,
reaching up to 25 feet in height (Fig. 1). Most
specimens only grow to about 12 to 18 feet tall. The
shiny, pinnately compound leaves change to a brilliant
orange, red, or yellow in the fall before dropping. The
yellowish-white, summertime flowers appear in 6 to
10-inch-long and wide, terminal panicles and are quite
showy. The hairy fruits which follow are orange/red
and mature in October.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Rhus lanceolata
Pronunciation: roose lan-see-oh-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Texan Sumac, Prairie Flameleaf
Sumac, Prairie Sumac
Family: Anacardiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; oblong; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-569, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Rhus lanceolata -- Texan Sumac Page 2
Leaf color: green
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall color: orange; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; reddish
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Rhus lanceolata -- Texan Sumac Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Training is required to make this large shrub into a
tree. Begin by staking the main stem in the upright
position for a year or two and develop branches
beginning at two to four feet from the ground. Space
branches 8 to 12 inches apart and be sure than they
form a wide angle with the trunk. This will help
ensure that they are well attached to the tree.
Occasional pinching or heading back of the terminal
shoot and branches will increase branching. Suckers
from the base of the trunk may have to be removed
periodically to maintain a neat appearance.
Place Texan Sumac in a prominent location in the
landscape in the full sun. It is a nice tree for planting
in a low ground cover to display the interesting trunk
and branch arrangement. The fine-textured foliage,
showy flower display and bright fall color combine to
make this small tree suitable for increased usage in
southern landscapes.
Sumac should be grown in full sun on welldrained soil, acid or alkaline. This tree is often found
on limestone or clay soils with a high soil pH in its
native habitat, but it also grows on acidic soil. It
would be well suited for inclusion in a low
maintenance landscape where plants receive little if
any irrigation. Too much irrigation and fertilization
can lead to plant decline.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
There are no serious pests or diseases as long as
plants are not overwatered.