Fact Sheet ST-570
October 1994
Robinia pseudoacacia
Figure 1. Middle-aged Black Locust.
Black Locust1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A fast-growing native deciduous tree, Black
Locust is capable of reaching 70 to 80 feet in height
but is more often seen 30 to 50 feet tall with a spread
of 20 to 35 feet (Fig. 1). The upright growth and
short, irregular branches form an open canopy and cast
light shade below the tree, allowing a lawn to thrive.
The 6 to 14-inch-long, dull, blue/green leaves, made
up of multiple leaflets, are some of the last to appear
in spring and often drop early in the autumn, just
barely fading to a sickly yellow/green before dropping.
For approximately a 10-day period in late spring, the
trees are festooned with four to eight-inch-long, dense
clusters of extremely fragrant, one-inch white blossoms
(similar to sweet-peas) which are literally "alive" with
the bustling activity of visiting bees. The honey which
is produced is quite delicious and sought-after. The
two to four-inch-long, dark red to black, leathery seeds
pods which follow will persist on the trees throughout
the winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Robinia pseudoacacia
Pronunciation: roe-BIN-nee-uh
soo-doe-uh-KAY-shuh
Common name(s): Black Locust, Common Locust
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; shade tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 70 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-570, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Robinia pseudoacacia -- Black Locust Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong; obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy;
fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent
on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; thorns are present on the trunk or branches
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.69
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Robinia pseudoacacia -- Black Locust Page 3
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Figure 3. Foliage of Black Locust.
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
These seeds are widely dispersed by birds and
other wildlife, and along with the root suckering and
invasive root system, Black Locust can spread into
surrounding landscapes. This feature, along with the
thorns found along the branches, should be considered
when placing Black Locust in the ornamental garden.
It is probably best saved for the reclamation project or
roadside planting where trees receive no maintenance.
If left to its own devices, it will form dense thickets,
even on the poorest soils, a fact which makes it quite
useful in reclamation applications.
Although the wood of Black Locust is reputed to
be extremely strong and durable (pioneers used it to
fashion nails for building ships and houses), the
branches are brittle and subject to damage in high
winds. This may be due largely to the tendency for
the branches to form a narrow angle with the trunk
and to grow aggressively relative to the trunk forming
embedded bark. This can be partially corrected by
pruning the major branches so they grow to no more
than about half the size of the trunk.
Able to tolerate drought, salt, and poor soil, Black
Locust will grow in full sun or partial shade on almost
any soil acid or alkaline except that which is
permanently wet. A tough tree which should be saved
for the toughest sites. Not for general use in urban
areas due to borer problems unless located in a moist,
well-drained site with plenty of soil space.
Cultivars include: ‘Erecta’, upright form; ‘Frisia’ -
yellowish leaves in early summer; and ‘Purple Robe’,
lavender flowers. ‘Purple Robe’ is gorgeous in full
bloom
Robinia pseudoacacia -- Black Locust Page 4
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests
Locust borer is a serious pest although borerresistant clones are now being developed. It is also
bothered by carpenterworm, locust leaf miner, and
scales. Leaf miner is a universal problem, and the
trees along the highways in the south can be seen in
summer riddled with damage from this pest.
Diseases
Black Locust is susceptible to canker, leaf spot,
and powdery mildew.