Fact Sheet ST-575
October 1994
Sabal palmetto
Figure 1. Mature Cabbage Palm.
Cabbage Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Capable of reaching 90 feet or more in the woods
(when shaded or protected by surrounding trees) but
usually seen at 40 to 50 feet in height, this amazingly
sturdy native palm has a rough, fibrous trunk that is
quite variable in shape, from straight and erect, to
curved or leaning (Fig. 1). Cabbage Palm is topped
with a very dense, 10 to 15-foot-diameter, round
crown of deeply cut, curved, palmate leaves. This is
South Carolina’s and Florida’s state tree, and is wellsuited to use as a street planting, framing tree,
specimen, or clustered in informal groupings of
varying size. Cabbage Palm is ideal for seaside
locations. The four to five-foot-long, creamy white,
showy flower stalks in the summer are followed by
small, shiny, green to black fruits which are relished
by squirrels, raccoons, and other wildlife.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sabal palmetto
Pronunciation: SAY-bull pahl-MET-oh
Common name(s): Cabbage Palm, Cabbage Palmetto
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in
size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-575, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sabal palmetto -- Cabbage Palm Page 2
Availability: generally available in many areas within
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: spiral
Leaf type: costapalmate
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: orbiculate; star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: >36 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: attracts squirrels and other
mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs,
or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Sabal palmetto -- Cabbage Palm Page 3
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Cabbage Palm is about as hurricane-proof as a tree
can be. They stand after many hurricanes have blown
over the oaks and snapped the pines in two. They
adapt well to small cutouts in the sidewalk, and can
even create shade if planted on 6 to 10 foot centers.
Clean the trunk of leaf bases to eliminate a habitat for
roaches.
Cabbage Palm is exceptionally easy to transplant
and will thrive in full sun or partial shade. It will
adapt to slightly brackish water as well as dry, sandy
locations and requires no special care once established.
But it needs to be watered regularly until established
since all cut roots die back to the trunk after
transplanting. New roots are regenerated from the
base of the trunk and require warm soil temperatures
and plenty of water to survive. There is evidence
showing that removing all the fronds increases
transplant survival. Tie the top-most fronds together if
only lower fronds are removed so that the bud is
protected during transport. Cabbage Palm is droughttolerant, but not until it is well-established in the
landscape after transplanting. New transplants
(particularly those receiving too little water) are
particularly susceptible to the palm weevil which kills
the palm. Although one of the hardier palms, 11-
degrees F. killed about twenty-five percent of the
Cabbage Palms in 1983 in Baton Rouge.
Cabbage Palms are generally collected from
existing stands and are not grown in nurseries. Seeds
germinate readily in the landscape, generating many
seedlings. Removing the seedlings from beneath the
canopy can be a nuisance.
Sabal peregrina, planted in Key West, grows to
about 25 feet high. Sabal minor, a native Dwarf
Palmetto, creates an exotic, usually stemless shrub,
four feet high and wide. Older Dwarf Palmettos
develop trunks to six feet tall. Sabal mexicana grows
in Texas and looks similar to Sabal Palmetto.
Pests
Giant palm weevil, cabbage palm caterpillar, and a
large number of scales infest Cabbage Palm. The
giant palm weevil attacks recently transplanted palms
and can kill them.
Diseases
Ganoderma butt rot is perhaps the most serious
disease of Cabbage Palms. It kills palms which it
infects. The disease enters the trunk primarily through
injuries on the lower trunk and roots. Avoid irrigating
the trunk. There is no control for butt rot, only
prevention. Remove infected palms as soon as
possible.