Fact Sheet ST-576
October 1994
Salix spp.
Figure 1. Mature Weeping Willow.
Weeping Willow1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Often when one envisions a quiet body of water,
the graceful, elegant form of a Weeping Willow is
seen at the water’s edge, the long, light green,
pendulous branches reflected in the water, gently
swaying with each little breeze (Fig. 1). Though it
does well in very moist soils, Weeping Willows may
also be successfully used as a fast-growing specimen
or screen in drier, more open areas where it should
receive regular watering to prevent leaf drop in a
drought. It will survive drought but loses some leaves
without irrigation. Ultimately reaching a height of 35
to 45 feet with an equal or greater spread, Weeping
Willow should be given plenty of room to develop its
broad, rounded crown.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Salix spp.
Pronunciation: SAY-licks species
Common name(s): Weeping Willow, Babylon
Weeping Willow
Family: Salicaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 45 to 70 feet
Spread: 45 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; weeping
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-576, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Salix spp. -- Weeping Willow Page 2
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Care should be taken not to locate Weeping
Willows near underground water or sewer lines or
close to septic tank drain fields where the roots could
cause significant damage. Roots are aggressive and
will spread about three times the distance from the
trunk to the edge of the canopy and often grow on the
soil surface. Weeping Willows are deciduous, the
thin, three to six-inch-long leaves turning yellow
before falling.
Locate Weeping Willow only where there is
adequate space for its large, imposing form. Not for
residential lots, it is best located near water where soil
will be undisturbed. It is often planted near retention
ponds and lakes for a dramatic softening effect.
Willows were used by Indians as medicine, the
young twigs and bark chewed to relieve headaches. It
was later found the active ingredient was salicylic
acid, the basis of today’s aspirin.
Weeping Willows should be grown in full sun or
very light shade and will tolerate a wide range of soil
conditions, including alkaline pH. All willows will
need initial pruning and training when young to
develop a strong, central trunk with branch crotches as
wide as possible. This will increase the longevity of
the tree and help overcome the problem with brittle
wood but the trees are usually still short-lived to 30-
years, or so.
Cultivars include: ‘Aurea’, with golden-yellow
branches; ‘Crispa’, corkscrew willow, has interesting
leaves curled into a ring; ‘Golden Curls’, moderately
weeping, has golden bark with twisting branches and
leaves; ‘Babylon’, excellent, broadly weeping habit;
‘Tristis’ a popular weeping willow.
Salix spp. -- Weeping Willow Page 3
Pests
Some of its pests are scales, caterpillars, borers,
and aphids. The willow is a favored host for the
gypsy moth.
Diseases
Root rot can occasionally infect root systems and
cause decline.
Crown gall causes galls to form near the soil line
or farther up the plant. Take out infected plants and
do not replant in the same area for at least two years.
Willow scab attacks and kills young leaves within
a very short time. The fungus enters twigs, kills back
the young shoots and causes cankers. Olive green
spore masses can be seen along the veins on the
undersides of leaves. Another fungus, Physalospora
miyabeana, attacks willow and the two fungi in
combination cause willow blight. Prune out infected
branches and use resistant species.
Black canker causes dark brown spots on the
leaves. Whitish gray lesions with black borders appear
on the twigs and stems. Prune out infected branches
and use resistant species. Weeping willow appears to
be resistant.
Many fungi cause cankers on willow and infected
branches are pruned out. If the trunk is infected and
girdled, the tree will die. Keep trees healthy by
regular fertilization.
Many fungi cause leaf spots but are not serious
enough to warrant preventive sprays. Rake up the
fallen diseased leaves in the fall.
Powdery mildew causes a white coating on the
leaves. The disease is usually not serious.
Rust causes yellow spots on the lower surface of
leaves and, if severe, defoliation. Rake up and destroy
leaves from diseased trees.
Tar spot causes black, raised spots on leaves
which are harmless. Rake up and dispose of fallen
leaves from diseased trees at the end of the growing
season.