Fact Sheet ST-577
October 1994
Salix matsudana ‘Tortuosa’
Figure 1. Middle-aged Corkscrew Willow.
Corkscrew Willow1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A small to medium-sized, upright spreading tree of
about 30 feet in height with a 15-foot-spread, the main
ornamental feature of this plant is the contorted and
twisted branches and twigs (Fig. 1). Branches arise
from the trunk at an acute angle and grow up almost
parallel to the trunk before they curve back to the
horizontal. The winter branch pattern is most
interesting and probably accounts for the popularity of
the tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Salix matsudana ‘Tortuosa’
Pronunciation: SAY-licks mat-soo-DAY-nuh
Common name(s): Corkscrew Willow, Pekin
Willow, Hankow Willow
Family: Salicaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-577, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Salix matsudana ‘Tortuosa’ -- Corkscrew Willow Page 2
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: good
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Salix matsudana ‘Tortuosa’ -- Corkscrew Willow Page 3
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Figure 3. Foliage of Corkscrew Willow.
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree makes a nice accent or specimen in a
residential or commercial landscape but does not have
the long-life needed for a permanent street tree. The
tree has the same undesirable features of other willows
including weak wood and insect problems. Weak
branch crotches can make the tree fairly prone to
breakage as it grows older. Also very prone to trunk
and branch decay initiated by mechanical injuries.
Like many willows, this one does best in moist areas
but will tolerate some drought. Surface roots can be a
problem as the tree grows older. Locate carefully
since it is usually short-lived with aggressive roots and
breaks apart as it gets older. Not for general planting
but can be used for an occasional specimen.
The cultivar ‘Pendula’ has a fine-texture weeping
form reminiscent of a water garden. Plant it near
water to create a quieting effect. Other cultivars exist
with different canopy forms and foliage variations.
The tree is propagated by cuttings.
Pests
Aphids cause deposits of honeydew on lower
leaves. Spraying large trees may not be necessary as
predatory insects will bring the aphid population down.
Gypsy moth enjoys eating willows.
Imported willow leaf beetles are metallic blue and
the larvae are black. The larvae do most of the
feeding on leaves. The adults eat the entire leaf while
larvae skeletonize the leaves. There are two
generations per year. Damage is usually not severe
enough to warrant control.
Lace bugs cause mottling and yellowing of the
leaves. The insects are small, found under the leaves,
and have transparent wings with dark veins.
Poplar and willow borer in the trunk may be
serious on newly planted trees. In spring the insects
expel frass through openings in the trunk. The frass
clings to the bark. Irrigate willows until well
established.
Diseases
Usually none are serious enough to warrant
control.
Crown gall causes galls to form near the soil line
or farther up the plant. Take out infected plants and
do not replant in the same area for at least two years.
Willow scab attacks and kills young leaves within
a very short time. The fungus enters twigs, kills back
the young shoots and causes cankers. Olive green
spore masses can be seen along the veins on the
undersides of leaves. Another fungus, Physalospora
miyabeana, attacks willow and the two fungi in
combination cause willow blight. Prune out infected
branches and use resistant species.
Black canker causes dark brown spots on the
leaves. Whitish gray lesions with black borders appear
on the twigs and stems. Prune out infected branches
and use resistant species. Weeping willow appears to
be resistant.
Many fungi cause cankers on willow and infected
branches are pruned out. If the trunk is infected and
girdled, the tree will die. Keep trees healthy by
regular fertilization.
Many fungi cause leaf spots but are not serious
enough to warrant preventive sprays. Rake up the
fallen diseased leaves in the fall.
Powdery mildew causes a white coating on the
leaves. The disease is usually not serious.
Rust causes yellow spots on the lower surface of
leaves and, if severe, defoliation. Rake up and destroy
leaves from diseased trees.
Tar spot causes black, raised spots on leaves
which are harmless. Rake up and dispose of fallen
leaves from diseased trees at the end of the growing
season.