Fact Sheet ST-578
October 1994
Sambucus canadensis
Figure 1. Mature American Elder.
American Elder1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A fast-growing deciduous shrub, American Elder
suckers quite easily and is often seen as a broad,
spreading, multistemmed plant with bright green,
pinnately compound, 12 to 14-inch-long leaves
arranged along the arching branches (Fig. 1). But it
can be effectively pruned into a nice, small, single or
multi-stemmed, small, flowering tree but needs regular
pruning to remove suckers growing from the base of
the plant. In early summer (northern part of its range)
or sporadically all year long (in USDA hardiness zones
9 and 10), American Elder is literally smothered with
6 to 10-inch-wide clusters of yellowish-white blooms.
These are followed by a multitude of small, dark
purple berries which are quite popular with birds, and
can be used in pies, jellies, or fermented to make a
wine. Some reference books refer to Sambucus
simpsonii as a separate species, but this is probably a
southern extension of Sambucus canadensis.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sambucus canadensis
Pronunciation: sam-BEW-kuss kan-uh-DEN-sis
Common name(s): American Elder, Common Elder
Family: Caprifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; near a deck
or patio; reclamation plant; trainable as a standard;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 8 to 12 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-578, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sambucus canadensis -- American Elder Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; no significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Sambucus canadensis -- American Elder Page 3
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Ideal for use in naturalized landscapes where it
will tolerate acid or alkaline soil and even some
drought, American Elder performs best in full sun on
moist to wet, fertile soils. Plant it in the shrub border
or locate it next to the patio for a wonderful flower
display. The plant is often overlooked by the trade
perhaps because it is so commonly found in and along
the woods, but it has a place in the garden, although
its rather random habit may not make it popular in the
commercial landscape. Requires pruning to create a
neat small tree.
A few cultivars include: ‘Acutiloba’, leaflets very
deeply divided, a nice fine-textured plant; ‘Aurea’,
bright red fruit, yellow leaves; ‘Adams’, fruits in
dense, large clusters, excellent for baking. There are a
variety of other very attractive species.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests
Borers, occasional leaf-chewing insects, may infest
this tree.
Diseases
American Elder can be infected by cankers, leaf
spots, powdery mildew.