Fact Sheet ST-580
October 1994
Sambucus mexicana
Figure 1. Mature Mexican Elder.
Mexican Elder1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Mexican Elder is a semi-evergreen small tree,
reaching up to 30 feet in height (Fig. 1). Most opengrown specimens do not reach this height as they grow
wider than tall. The light green, thick, leathery,
pinnately compound leaves are often browsed by deer
and livestock. The four to eight-inch-wide, flat cymes
of yellow/white blooms appear mainly from April to
June but in its native habitat may also occur at various
times throughout the year after heavy rains. The
small, blue/black fruits which follow the blooms are
quite popular with birds and can be used to make wine
or pies, and were reportedly even dried by Indians to
be used at a later time. Fruits appear white because
they are covered with a thick, waxy coating. A dye
can be made from the stems and has been used to
color baskets.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sambucus mexicana
Pronunciation: sam-BEW-kuss meck-sih-KAY-nuh
Common name(s): Mexican Elder
Family: Caprifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway; near
a deck or patio; reclamation plant; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; weeping
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-580, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sambucus mexicana -- Mexican Elder Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound; trifoliate
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: semievergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; white
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Sambucus mexicana -- Mexican Elder Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Mexican Elder.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Trees are best located in the open where they can
develop their low, wide-spreading, uniform crown. It
might be planted near a patio, or as a small shade tree
in a backyard garden but the dropping fruit can be
messy on brick, concrete and other hard surfaces.
Young trees often require training and pruning to
speed formation of a uniform crown. Save the more
upright branches and remove the drooping ones to
create greater clearance beneath the canopy.
Mexican Elder should be grown in full sun on
well-drained soil.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.