Fact Sheet ST-582
October 1994
Sapindus saponaria
Figure 1. Mature Florida Soapberry.
Florida Soapberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Florida Soapberry grows at a moderate rate to 30
to 40 feet tall (Fig. 1). The pinnately compound,
evergreen leaves are 12 inches long with each leaflet
four inches long. Ten-inch-long panicles of small,
white flowers appear during fall, winter, and spring but
these are fairly inconspicuous. The fleshy fruits which
follow are less than an inch-long, shiny, and
orange/brown. The seeds inside are poisonous, a fact
which should be considered in the tree’s placement in
the landscape, especially if children will be present.
The bark is rough and gray. The common name of
Soapberry comes from to the soap-like material which
is made from the berries in tropical countries.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sapindus saponaria
Pronunciation: SAP-in-dus sap-oh-NAIR-ee-uh
Common name(s): Florida Soapberry, Wingleaf
Soapberry
Family: Sapindaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; shade tree;
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 40 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: sinuate; undulate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-582, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sapindus saponaria -- Florida Soapberry Page 2
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: brown; orange
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Sapindus saponaria -- Florida Soapberry Page 3
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
Figure 3. Foliage of Florida Soapberry.
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Soapberry can be planted in low maintenance
landscapes for the unusually prominent, orange-colored
berries. They require little care other than some initial
pruning to direct growth and to develop a strong
branch structure. The bushy growth habit of this
medium-sized tree combines nicely with shrubs and
ground covers planted beneath and around the tree.
Fruits attract the boxelder bug.
Florida Soapberry should be grown in full sun and
will tolerate almost any soil. It is highly drought- and
salt-tolerant.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.