Fact Sheet ST-581
October 1994
Sapindus drummondii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Western Soapberry.
Western Soapberry1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Western Soapberry is native to central and western
Texas and an excellent shade or ornamental tree,
reaching 40 to 50 feet in height with an equal spread,
forming a billowy, deciduous crown (Fig. 1). The
crown is usually quite open showing the trunk and
some major limbs but this varies from tree to tree.
Not a uniformly-shaped crown, some vase-shaped,
others round. The medium green, glossy leaves have
downy undersides and the leaves turn a beautiful,
deep, yellow-gold hue in fall. The small, yellowishwhite springtime blooms appear in 6 to 10-inch
terminal panicles and are followed by translucent,
yellow-orange, half-inch, grape-like, clustered fruits
which persist through the fall, eventually ripening to
black. The low-branching habit, furrowed, red-brown
to grey-brown bark covering the strong, broad trunk,
and clusters of translucent berries of Soapberry
provides much winter interest when the branches are
bare. The common name is derived from the fact that
the fruits, when crushed in water, create great
quantities of suds and were used by West
Indian/Mexican natives as a laundry soap, floor wax
and varnish.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sapindus drummondii
Pronunciation: SAP-in-dus drum-AWN-dee-eye
Common name(s): Western Soapberry
Family: Sapindaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; reclamation plant; shade tree;
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-581, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sapindus drummondii -- Western Soapberry Page 2
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2
inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: black; orange; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Sapindus drummondii -- Western Soapberry Page 3
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
Figure 3. Foliage of Western Soapberry.
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: seeds itself into the landscape
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Fruit maintains showy orange-yellow color on the
tree throughout the winter. Fruit drops while it is firm
and does not rot to create a mess but people could roll
on it and fall on a sidewalk. The abundant fruits may
create an unwelcome invasion of seedling volunteers.
Plant it in a lawn area where regular mowings prevent
seedlings from developing. Due to the risk of
dermatitis and possible poisoning from the fruit, use
Western Soapberry as an ornamental or median-strip
street tree away from where children would regularly
contact the fruit.
A North American native, Western Soapberry
grows in full sun or partial shade on a wide variety of
soils. The crown is much denser in full-day sun.
Western Soapberry is particularly well-suited to urban
conditions, tolerating wind, drought, and infertile soils
with ease. Transplants easily and establishes with only
minimal irrigation. The close-grained, strong wood
makes this tree very resistant to wind damage and
adaptable to urban landscapes. Excellent for poor,
compacted or alkaline soil. Root suckers can be a
problem in sandy soil but apparently not in clay.
There may be a fruitless cultivar originating in
Oklahoma which would make it suitable for a much
broader usage including downtown streets and patios.
Propagation is by seed or hardwood cuttings.
Seedlings transplant easily.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern although
dwarf mistletoe can be quite a problem. One of a few
plants apparently resistant to root rot. Powdery
mildew, leaf spot and leaf blight have been reported in
Texas but it is usually a pest-free tree.