Fact Sheet ST-583
October 1994
Sapium sebiferum
Figure 1. Mature Chinese Tallowtree.
Chinese Tallowtree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
With oval, pointed, deciduous leaves and an oval,
open canopy, Chinese Tallowtree creates soft, dappled
shade, (Fig. 1). The trunk normally dominates,
snaking up through the crown sporting major limbs
well spaced along the trunk. Enough light will
penetrate to allow lawn grasses to thrive beneath this
rapidly-growing, 30 to 35-foot-tall tree. Yellow
terminal flower spikes appear in spring and are
followed by brown capsules which burst and fall off,
leaving behind wax-coated, white, berrylike seeds,
hence the common name, Popcorn tree. These berries
persist throughout the winter, even after the fluttering,
heart-shaped leaves have turned gorgeous autumn
shades of red, yellow or orange and have fallen.
Tallowtree is one of the only reliable fall coloring
trees for USDA hardiness zones 8b and 9a. The new
growth in spring is red-tinged. The waxy coating on
the seeds is extracted by the Chinese for use in candles
and soap and the milky sap inside the twigs is
poisonous.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sapium sebiferum
Pronunciation: SAY-pee-um suh-BIFF-er-um
Common name(s): Chinese Tallowtree, Popcorn
Tree, Tallowtree
Family: Euphorbiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: not recommended for planting
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-583, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sapium sebiferum -- Chinese Tallowtree Page 2
Leaf shape: deltoid; ovate; rhomboid
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate; reticulate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; white
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; persistent on the tree;
showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Sapium sebiferum -- Chinese Tallowtree Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Tallowtree.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Chinese Tallowtree is easily grown in full sun on
a wide range of soils and is particularly droughtresistant and tolerant of compacted and wet soil. The
abundant seeds create a multitude of unwanted
volunteer seedlings. Roots tend to grow quite large
near the soil surface and can be a nuisance in the
lawn. There are places in Florida and in the Houston,
Texas area where the tree has escaped cultivation and
is invading native woodlands and the edge of
wetlands. Therefore, use of this tree is not
recommended! The wood is brittle and small to
medium-sized branches often split from the tree as it
grows to 15-years-old.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.