Fact Sheet ST-584
October 1994
Sassafras albidum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Sassafras.
Sassafras1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This lovely, deciduous, native North American tree
is pyramidal when young but later develops into a 30
to 60-foot-tall by 25 to 40-foot-wide, rounded canopy
composed of many short, horizontal branches which
give the tree a layered effect (Fig. 1). For years,
Sassafras was grown for the supposedly-medicinal
properties of the fragrant roots and bark but it is the
outstanding fall display of foliage which should bring
it into the garden today. The large, multi-formed,
five-inch leaves, fragrant when crushed, are bright
green throughout the summer but are transformed into
magical shades of orange/pink, yellow/red, and even
scarlet/purple in the cooler months of autumn,
brightening the landscape wherever they are found.
These colors are especially prominent when Sassafras
is planted as a specimen or in a mixed shrubbery
border, with a background of dark evergreens.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sassafras albidum
Pronunciation: SASS-uh-frass AL-bih-dum
Common name(s): Sassafras
Family: Lauraceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; shade tree;
specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 30 to 60 feet
Spread: 25 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-584, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sassafras albidum -- Sassafras Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: lobed; entire
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous; fragrant
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; purple; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; tree
wants to grow with several trunks but can be trained to
grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thick
Wood specific gravity: 0.46
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Sassafras albidum -- Sassafras Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Sassafras.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
In spring before the leaves appear, the yellow,
lightly fragrant flowers of Sassafras appear in one to
two-inch-long terminal panicles and are followed by
extremely attractive fruits. The small, dark blue, shiny
drupes with bright red stalks ripen in early autumn and
are quickly eaten by birds and other wildlife.
Although the male plants have showier blossoms, it is
the female plants which produce the fruit. Both sexes
must be planted to insure this happy occurrence.
Lastly, the roots can be brewed into a tea.
Sassafras frequently develops a multiple trunk due
to sprouting at the base. Sprouts appear to originate
from the root system forming a cluster of showy, grey
fissured trunks growing from the soil. This
characteristic has helped it invade and colonize old
fields and other disturbed sites. Prune early in the life
of the tree to form a single trunk suitable for urban
landscape planting, or grow with multiple trunks for a
dramatic specimen. Single-trunked trees are bestsuited for street tree planting and other urban and
suburban areas, and they usually maintain this good
form without pruning.
Common Sassafras should be grown in full sun or
partial shade, preferably on moist, well-drained acid
soil but it will tolerate drier, rocky sites, where it is
sometimes found in the wild. Richer fall colors are
displayed on trees grown in the full sun and in the
northern part of its region. Reportedly difficult to
transplant due to its long tap root on well-drained soils
and few but large-diameter lateral roots. This problem
can be somewhat overcome by purchasing trees grown
in containers but even container-grown plants can have
a sparse root system.
Propagation is by seed or root cuttings.
Pests
Usually no pests are of major concern but it can
be bothered by Japanese beetle, promethea moth,
Sassafras weevil, and scales.
Diseases
Potential diseases include cankers, leaf spots,
mildew, wilt, root rot.