Fact Sheet ST-586
October 1994
Schefflera arboricola
Figure 1. Young Dwarf Schefflera.
Dwarf Schefflera1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This evergreen shrub has attractive dark green,
glossy, palmate leaves densely covering flexible, green
stems which gently fan out into a rounded crown (Fig.
1). Plants are usually seen with multiple stems
sprouting from the base. Branching can be encouraged
by pinching the stems, which forms a denser shrub. It
can be pruned into a small tree over a period of years
where it would make an accent or patio tree. The tree
remains a green mass, not changing during the year,
except when it displays the brilliant orange-yellow
fruit in the winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Schefflera arboricola
Pronunciation: shef-LEER-uh ar-bor-ih-KOLE-uh
Common name(s): Dwarf Schefflera
Family: Araliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
hedge; suitable for growing indoors; near a deck or
patio; trainable as a standard; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 6 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-586, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Schefflera arboricola -- Dwarf Schefflera Page 2
Flower
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Schefflera arboricola -- Dwarf Schefflera Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Dwarf Schefflera.
A popular house plant, Dwarf Schefflera performs
well in a variety of outdoor settings. It can be used as
a hedge, specimen planting, poolside container plant,
and even trains well into an espalier on the wall of a
building. Aerial roots originate from the lower
portions of the trunks and branches, and root into the
ground.
Dwarf Schefflera is adaptable to sun, part sun or
deep shade and does best on light, sandy, well-drained
soils. The plant prefers soil which is kept on the dry
side. One of the best hedges for shady areas.
There is a cultivar available with variegated
foliage.
Propagation is by seed, cuttings, or air-layers.
Pests
Scale and spider mites may be a problem when
Dwarf Schefflera is grown indoors but outdoors pest
problems are rare. Occasionally scale may infest this
tree.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.