Fact Sheet ST-587
October 1994
Sciadopitys verticillata
Figure 1. Mature Japanese Umbrella-Pine.
Japanese Umbrella-Pine1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This small tree is used for its unusual texture and
growth habit (Fig. 1). The tree will grow very slowly
to about 25 to 40 feet tall (in 100 years) and spreads
about 15 feet. On young plants the branches stick
straight out from the single, straight trunk but become
more pendulous with age. The tree grows in a tight
pyramid which can be utilized in a rock garden or
other small residential landscape site. The effect is
much like the ribs on an umbrella. Due to the unusual
nature of the plant, people either love this tree or
won’t even look at it.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sciadopitys verticillata
Pronunciation: sigh-uh-DOP-ih-tiss
ver-tiss-ill-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Japanese Umbrella-Pine
Family: Taxodiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; specimen;
no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 12 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-587, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sciadopitys verticillata -- Japanese Umbrella-Pine Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: whorled (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see; parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches; 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Sciadopitys verticillata -- Japanese Umbrella-Pine Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Umbrella-Pine.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
A bit of shade during the hot part of the day will
produce the best plants in the southern part of its
range. The orange, peeling bark is quite attractive but
is usually hidden by the foliage. Provide a moist,
acidic soil and protection from the wind. The tree is
probably best used as a specimen, occasionally for
private, protected gardens for a very special effect. A
truly unique tree which grows very slowly, it is rare in
cultivation. Only the most patient nursery operators
grow this plant.
Propagated by seed or from cuttings.
‘Pendula’ is listed as a cultivar with pendulous
branches.
Pests and Diseases
No serious pests or diseases exist for this tree.