Fact Sheet ST-588
October 1994
Senna spectabilis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Cassia.
Cassia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Cassia is a medium to large tree from tropical
America and reaches 60 feet in height, but is often
much smaller (Fig. 1). The pinnately compound
leaflets have fuzzy undersides and are three inches
long. The bright yellow flowers are 1.5 inches wide
but appear in dense racemes up to two feet long. The
cylindrical seedpods which follow are 12 inches long.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Senna spectabilis
Pronunciation: SEN-uh speck-TAB-ih-liss
Common name(s): Cassia
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; trainable as a
standard; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet
in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: oblong; obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-588, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Senna spectabilis -- Cassia Page 2
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; summer
flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Senna spectabilis -- Cassia Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Cassia.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree is best used in an open, sunny, park-like
setting where the bright flowers can be displayed and
enjoyed. This will form a large mass of delicate
foliage covered with yellow flowers for about two
months each year. Lower branches often reach to the
ground as they droop under the weight of the flowers.
These branches can be removed to create clearance
beneath the tree for pedestrians and vehicles. This
would make the tree suited for planting along streets
provided major branches were developed with good
attachments to the trunk. Unpruned trees branch
poorly, and large-diameter limbs often develop
forming a coarse-textured branching structure. Regular
heading back lateral branches as they develop from the
trunk on small trees helps to create more branching
and a more uniformly shaped crown. Occasional
pruning during the life of the tree will help maintain
this regular shape.
Cassia should be grown in full sun on well-drained
soil. It appears to adapt to alkaline soil.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.