Fact Sheet ST-590
October 1994
Simarouba glauca
Figure 1. Young Paradise-Tree.
Paradise-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The pinnately compound, 16-inch leaves of
Paradise-Tree have multiple, three-inch-long, shiny,
leathery, oblong leaflets which are reddish when young
(Fig. 1). An upright tree when young, Paradise-Tree
ultimately reaches 50 feet in height with a 30-foot
spread and creates a dense, rounded crown at maturity.
The tiny, inconspicuous, yellowish, springtime blooms
on this frost-sensitive tree are followed by small
clusters of dark purple, one-inch-long, edible fruits.
Although Paradise-Tree produces desirable shade, the
seeds and fruits are messy and will stain hard surfaces,
and the shallow surface roots are troublesome to
sidewalks and driveways and make it difficult to
operate a lawn mower beneath the canopy.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Simarouba glauca
Pronunciation: sim-uh-ROO-buh GLAW-kuh
Common name(s): Paradise-Tree
Family: Simaroubaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; shade tree; specimen; residential street
tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 25 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-590, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Simarouba glauca -- Paradise-Tree Page 2
Crown shape: round; upright
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: oblong; obovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: purple
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; inconspicuous and not showy; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Simarouba glauca -- Paradise-Tree Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Paradise-Tree.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The coarse leaf texture and light green, compound
foliage allows this tree to "stand out" in a crowd. It
could be used as a boulevard or median street tree.
Plant them on 25 to 30 foot centers to form a solid
canopy above.
Paradise-Tree grows in full sun or partial shade on
almost any well-drained soil. A native to south
Florida, it will grow quickly on rich soils high in
organic matter and should be protected from frost.
Large trees are reportedly difficult to establish from
containers, but there are no scientific studies
supporting this notion.
Propagation is by seed, which germinate easily
and rapidly. Young plants or seedlings are easily
transplanted.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.