Fact Sheet ST-592
October 1994
Sophora japonica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Scholar Tree.
Scholar Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Sophora species grows to a height of 40 to 60 feet
and spread of 30 to 45 feet, forming a fine-textured,
round canopy even as a young tree (Fig. 1). It has a
rapid growth rate and tolerates polluted city conditions,
heat, and drought. The tree prefers a sunny, open
location on any light soil. The very showy, greenishwhite to yellow flowers are produced in mid to late
summer and provide an airy feel to the tree for several
weeks. A yellow dye can be made by boiling the
dried flowers and buds in water. The young green
twigs turn a dark grey with age. The species tree must
be at least 10-years-old to bloom, but the cultivar
‘Regent’ blooms at six to eight-years-old.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sophora japonica
Pronunciation: sah-FOR-uh juh-PAWN-ih-kuh
Common name(s): Scholar Tree, Japanese Pagoda
Tree
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; shade tree; specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree
pit); residential street tree; tree has been successfully
grown in urban areas where air pollution, poor
drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 70 feet
Spread: 40 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-592, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sophora japonica -- Scholar Tree Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Sophora japonica -- Scholar Tree Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Scholar Tree.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree drops flower petals creating a creamy
white carpet for several weeks on the ground, but they
can temporarily stain sidewalks. The yellow fruit pods
form in late summer and are quite showy, dropping
later in the winter and could be a nuisance to some
people. But they are small and fairly easily washed
away. The leaflets are small, creating light shade
beneath the tree and are mostly washed away with rain
or fall into shrub beds or between the grass blades.
Some trees come from the nursery with multiple
trunks or branches clustered together at one spot on
the trunk. Buy those with one central trunk growing
up the center of the tree or prune the tree to a central
leader to create a strong, durable structure. Space
branches along the central leader to ensure good
branch attachment. It may take several prunings to
train the tree to the proper form.
This urban-tough tree is highly recommended for
urban street tree planting. Also makes a nice mediumsized patio tree and is well-suited for parking lot
planting, creating shade from its spreading canopy. It
is adapted to restricted soil spaces, and tolerates
drought in reasonable soil and is tolerant of salt spray.
Best when planted in full sun and well-drained, not
wet, soil.
Sophora species has a few cultivars: ‘Fastigiata’ -
upright habit; ‘Pendula’ - weeping habit; ‘Princeton
Upright’ - upright form suitable for narrow sites,
somewhat smaller than the species; ‘Regent’ - oval
crown and blooms at an early age, has glossy leaves
which shed soot and dirt, readily available in nurseries.
Pests
Potato leafhopper kills young stems causing
profuse branching or witches broom on small
branches. It usually is not a problem on larger trees.
Diseases
Sophora species is generally pest- and diseasefree.
Occasionally, Scholar Tree will get a fungus
canker about two-inches or less across, have raised
reddish brown margins and light brown centers. The
infected stem is killed when the fungus girdles the
stem. Another fungus is sometimes found on dead
branches on Sophora species. Frost injury may give
both fungi an entrance into the tree. Prune out dead,
damaged, or diseased branches.
Twig blight or dieback can be a problem
occasionally. Prune out infected branches and avoid
unnecessary wounding. Keep trees vigorous by
regular fertilization.
Powdery mildew forms a fungus mat which looks
like a white coating on the leaves. The disease is
usually not serious.