Fact Sheet ST-599
October 1994
Sorbus aucuparia
Figure 1. Middle-aged European Mountain-Ash.
European Mountain-Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
European Mountain-Ash has a rapid growth rate at
first but slows down with age, ultimately forming a
30-foot-tall, dense oval (Fig. 1). The white flowers
are somewhat showy, appearing in the spring after the
leaves. The tree shows its true colors when the fruit is
set in mid-summer. The wonderfully-showy, orangered fruit is borne in heavy clusters of about 40 berries
although cultivars are available with pink, yellow and
red fruits. Fruits are usually eaten by birds and often
don’t persist on the tree into the winter. Seeds
germinate quite readily in the landscape. The fall
color is red to yellow, although sometimes leaves
simply drop green.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sorbus aucuparia
Pronunciation: SOR-bus aw-kew-PAIR-ee-uh
Common name(s): European Mountain-Ash
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3B through 6 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet
wide); specimen; residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-599, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sorbus aucuparia -- European Mountain-Ash Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate; oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange; red; yellow
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; fruit, twigs, or
foliage cause significant litter; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Sorbus aucuparia -- European Mountain-Ash Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of European Mountain-Ash.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Vertically-oriented branches and multiple trunks
make this deciduous tree particularly attractive during
the winter. But this same characteristic can also cause
branches to break from the trunk due to poor
connections with the trunk. The tree is restricted to
northern areas due to lack of heat tolerance. It is a
tough, urban tolerant tree but is susceptible to several
pests including fire blight which can disfigure or kill
the tree.
Several cultivars make excellent street trees.
Cultivars are: ‘Asplenifolia’ - leaflets doubly
serrated; ‘Apricot Queen’ - apricot colored fruits;
‘Beissneri’ - deeply cut leaflets, red branchlets;
‘Brilliant Pink’ - pink fruits; ‘Cardinal’ - clear red
fruits; ‘Carpet of Gold’ - yellow fruit; ‘Cole’s
Columnar’ - upright growth habit; ‘Fastigiata’ - upright
growth habit; ‘Kirsten Pink’ - pink fruit;
‘Maidenblush’ - fruits white flushed with pink;
‘Pendula’ - weeping growth habit; ‘Rowencroft Pink
Coral’ - coral pink fruits; ‘Red Strain’ - fruits red;
‘Scarlet King’ - fruits scarlet; ‘Upright Yellow’ -
upright growth habit, yellow fruits; ‘Wilson’s
Columnar’ - upright growth; ‘Xanthocarpa’ - yellow
fruit, not attractive to birds.
Pests
Aphids cause distorted growth and deposits of
honeydew on leaves.
Mountain-Ash sawfly larvae are light green with
black dots and tend to feed in groups. The insects curl
the back of their bodies around the stems as they feed.
Scales of various types can usually be controlled
with sprays of horticultural oil.
Diseases
Bacterial fire blight causes leaves at the branch
tips to wilt, turn brown, but remain hanging on the
tree. The infected branches have a scorched
appearance and infected bark discolors, shrivels and
may crack or be shredded. There is usually a crack
between diseased and healthy bark. The bacteria are
washed down the branches and onto the trunk by rain.
Once the trunk is girdled the tree dies. Prune out
infected branches. Use of high nitrogen fertilizers can
increase susceptibility to fire blight.
Scab can cause severe defoliation. Early in the
growing season, olive brown spots form along the
mid-ribs of the leaflets. Later the leaves turn yellow
and the spots become more prominent. If the infection
is severe, infected leaves drop.
Several fungi cause twig and trunk cankers. As
cankers enlarge the part of the stem beyond the canker
dies. Avoid wounding trees and keep them healthy
with regular fertilization.
Powdery mildew forms a white coating on the
leaves.
Several rust diseases cause raised, light yellow
spots on the leaves. Later, orange fruiting bodies
appear on the spots on the lower leaf surface.