Fact Sheet ST-598
October 1994
Sorbus alnifolia
Figure 1. Mature Korean Mountain-Ash.
Korean Mountain-Ash1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Korean Mountain-Ash grows rather quickly into a
20 to 40-foot-tall deciduous tree with a broad,
rounded, 15 to 25-foot-wide, dense canopy which casts
dense shade below (Fig. 1). Young trees form a dense
oval. The two to four-inch-long, glossy, bright green,
simple leaves change to attractive hues of yellow,
orange, and rust in fall before dropping. In late spring
the trees are decorated with two to three-inch-diameter,
flat-topped clusters of tiny white blossoms, which may
appear in great number one year yet sparsely the next.
These blooms are followed by the production of small
but very showy, red to yellow fruits which
pendulously hang in five-inch clusters of two to ten
berries from tree branches. Fruit clusters are not as
dense as those of Sorbus aucuparia. The smooth, grey
bark of the branches provides a nice contrast for these
colorful fruits. These attractive, abundant fruits ripen
and cling to the tree, providing a welcome feast for
various types of weary, migrating birds. Fruit are
displayed nicely after leaves fall in autumn.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Sorbus alnifolia
Pronunciation: SOR-bus al-nih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Korean Mountain-Ash
Family: Rosaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); reclamation
plant; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 40 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-598, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Sorbus alnifolia -- Korean Mountain-Ash Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Sorbus alnifolia -- Korean Mountain-Ash Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Korean Mountain-Ash.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Partially due to the upright habit, weak crotches
can develop on branches which are allowed to grow to
larger than about half the diameter of the trunk.
Pruning early in the life of the tree will improve the
structure of the tree and help increase longevity in the
landscape.
It is tempting to plant this tree due to the nice
flowers, nice fruit display and bright fall color, but it
may be short-lived and is susceptible to fireblight. But
it is the most resistant of the Mountain-Ashes to
borers. It is probably best to locate the tree where
there is adequate open soil space for root development
so the tree will not be subjected to much stress.
Provided with some irrigation in a dry summer, this
tree will serve the landscape well for a number of
years. It has many outstanding attributes which people
will enjoy for a number of years after planting. Plant
it as an occasional specimen in a park or large
landscape for ornamental value and diversity, not as a
staple in large numbers.
Korean Mountain-Ash should be grown in full sun
on any well-drained soil, including slightly alkaline.
Any required pruning should be done in winter or
early spring to avoid exposing the wood to the
fireblight disease. Fireblight can cause serious damage
to the tree.
The cultivar ‘Redbird’ has rosy red fruits which
are quite popular with birds, and has a more upright
form. There are other hybrids and cultivars, all with
the same limitations.
Propagation is by seed, with difficulty, or by
grafting.
Pests
Aphids, pear leaf blister mite, Japanese leafhopper,
Mountain-Ash sawfly, and scales may infest this tree.
Korean Mountain-Ash is somewhat resistant to borers
which affect other Sorbus species, and probably should
be planted instead of European Mountain-Ash.
Diseases
Fireblight, crown gall, canker, leaf rusts, and scab
may infect this tree.