Fact Sheet ST-600
October 1994
Spathodea campanulata
Figure 1. Young African Tulip-Tree.
African Tulip-Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native of tropical Africa, this large, upright, 50
to 60-foot tree has a dense, 40-foot-wide crown and
one-and-one-half-foot-long, pinnately-compound,
evergreen leaves composed of four-inch leaflets (Fig.
1). Due to its size it is best located in large, open
landscapes and is generally not suited for small
residences unless your objective is deep shade. During
winter and until late spring, African Tulip-Tree
produces terminal clusters of beautiful blooms held
above the foliage, a profusion of upwardly-facing,
orange and yellow flowers which open several at a
time from curved, two-inch-long, fuzzy brown flower
buds filled with water. African Tulip-Tree is quite
spectacular when in bloom. It is often used as a
framing, shade, or specimen tree but must be used
only in frost-free areas. Also, its soft, brittle wood is
easily broken by high winds, and trees should be
located either in sheltered locations or where falling
branches will do no damage.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Spathodea campanulata
Pronunciation: spath-OH-dee-uh
kam-pan-yoo-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): African Tulip-Tree
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: shade tree; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading; upright
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-600, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Spathodea campanulata -- African Tulip-Tree Page 2
Crown density: moderate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: orange; yellow
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Spathodea campanulata -- African Tulip-Tree Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of African Tulip-Tree.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Eliminate major branches that will form embedded
bark as early as possible. Save those that are oriented
more horizontally, with stonger attachments to the
trunk. Keep them from growing larger than about half
the trunk diameter by periodic thinning.
African Tulip-Trees will grow rapidly in full sun
on any soil of reasonable drainage and fertility. Plants
should be regularly watered until well-established and
will then require little care.
Propagation is by seed, softwood cuttings, or root
suckers.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.