Fact Sheet ST-602
October 1994
Stewartia monadelpha
Figure 1. Middle-aged Tall Stewartia.
Tall Stewartia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Tall Stewartia grows 20 to 25 feet in height in as
many years though it has been known to reach 80 feet,
its young pyramidal crown maturing into an open,
multi-trunked form with somewhat horizontal branches
(Fig. 1). The 1.5 to 2.5-inch-long dark green leaves
cast light shade below this deciduous tree, and cling
well into the fall after changing to an attractive deep
red. In June the small, white, cupped flowers appear,
opening over a four-week period but are not
particularly striking. The smooth cinnamon-brown
bark is outstanding and help to make Tall Stewartia
quite striking in the winter landscape.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Stewartia monadelpha
Pronunciation: stoo-AR-tee-uh mawn-uh-DELL-fuh
Common name(s): Tall Stewartia
Family: Theaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6B through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking
lot islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree
pit); residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal; vase shape
Crown density: open
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-602, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Stewartia monadelpha -- Tall Stewartia Page 2
Growth rate: slow
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to
grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Stewartia monadelpha -- Tall Stewartia Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Tall Stewartia.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree can be used in much the same way as
Japanese Stewartia. It is unsurpassed as a specimen,
but can also be included in a shrub border, planted
near a patio or deck to show off the wonderful bark,
or used as a multi-trunked street tree planted on 20-
foot centers. Set it off as a specimen by placing it in
a bed of low, evergreen ground cover.
Best when grown in partial shade in USDA
hardiness zone 8b, Tall Stewartia can tolerate a full
sun position if its roots can be shaded by ground
cover, mulch or shrubbery. This may be the best
Stewartia species for the Deep South. Stewartia
monadelpha is a native species well-suited for the
Deep South. Well-drained, acid to neutral soil is best.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern, and this
tree should be grown and planted more often.