Fact Sheet ST-601
October 1994
Stewartia koreana
Figure 1. Young Korean Stewartia.
Korean Stewartia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Capable of reaching 50 feet in height, Korean
Stewartia is most often seen at 20 to 30 feet, its short,
interwoven branchlets forming a dense, pyramidal
canopy which casts deep shade below this deciduous
tree (Fig. 1). The one to four-inch-long by one to
three-inch-wide dark green leaves often turn to lovely
shades of orange, red, or purple in the fall but this is
not a reliable occurrence. Over a several week period
in June to July, Korean Stewartia is decorated with
lovely, pure white, yellow-centered blossoms, threeinches-across and flattened, appearing much like a
single camellia flower. Each flower is open for about
24 hours and they attract bees. Most other trees have
finished flowering by the time these flowers emerge.
The bark of Korean Stewartia is probably the most
outstanding characteristic, with orange/brown patches
showing through the flaking, grey bark.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Stewartia koreana
Pronunciation: stoo-AR-tee-uh kor-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Korean Stewartia
Family: Theaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking
lot islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; narrow tree
lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree
pit); residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-601, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Stewartia koreana -- Korean Stewartia Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal; upright
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: orange; purple; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; no significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; tree wants to
grow with several trunks but can be trained to grow
with a single trunk; very showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; gray
Stewartia koreana -- Korean Stewartia Page 3
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Figure 3. Foliage of Korean Stewartia.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree can be used in much the same way as
Japanese Stewartia. It is unsurpassed as a specimen,
but can also be included in a shrub border, planted
near a patio or deck to show off the wonderful bark,
or used as a multi-trunked street tree planted on 20-
foot centers. Set it off as a specimen by placing it in
a bed of low, evergreen ground cover.
Korean Stewartia should be grown in full sun but
reportedly looks best where it can receive some shade
during the hottest part of the day. However, there are
fine-looking specimens growing in poor clay soil in
USDA hardiness zone 7b with no irrigation which are
located in full-day sun. The soil should preferably be
moist, acid, and supplemented with organic matter.
Pruning is seldom required as growth rate is slow and
branches normally keep in bounds, staying close to the
tight canopy.
Propagation is by seed (with difficulty) or by
cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.