Fact Sheet ST-604
October 1994
Strelitzia nicolai
Figure 1. Middle-aged White Bird-of-Paradise.
White Bird-of-Paradise1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
White Bird-of-Paradise is most often planted for
its large, banana-like leaves and upright, clumping
stalks which give an exotic feel to the landscape (Fig.
1). Plants can reach 20 to 30 feet in height with a
spread of 10 feet though they are often seen much
smaller. The five to eight-foot-long, cold-tender leaves
are arranged in a fanlike display from the erect trunks
and appear much like Traveler’s-Tree. The lower
trunk becomes clear of leaves and exposed as the older
leaves drop off. Leaves rip along the veins as they are
blown by strong winds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Strelitzia nicolai
Pronunciation: streh-LIT-see-uh NICK-oh-lye
Common name(s): White Bird-of-Paradise, Giant
Bird-of-Paradise
Family: Strelitziaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; suitable for
growing indoors; near a deck or patio; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: oblong
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: >36 inches
Leaf color: green
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-604, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Strelitzia nicolai -- White Bird-of-Paradise Page 2
Fall color: no fall color change
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; year round flowering
Fruit
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The interesting flowers are white with a dark blue
tongue. White Bird-of-Paradise is ideal for
entranceways for a dramatic effect or for use at
poolside. Plants are not messy but ragged leaves
should be periodically removed for a tidy appearance.
Strelitzia nicolai -- White Bird-of-Paradise Page 3
This is a large plant and should be situated
Figure 3. Foliage of White Bird-of-Paradise.
accordingly.
White Bird-of-Paradise grows well in full sun to
light shade on moist, well-drained soil. Plants should
be protected from high winds to minimize torn, ragged
leaves. It will survive periods of 28-degrees F. with
minimal leaf burn and will quickly recover. Prune to
remove dead leaves and thin out surplus growth
sprouting from the base of the trunk, if you wish.
Propagation is by division of the suckers or from
seed which germinate slowly.
Pests
Scales may infest this tree.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.