Fact Sheet ST-605
October 1994
Styrax japonicus
Figure 1. Middle-aged Japanese Snowbell.
Japanese Snowbell1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Snowbell is a small deciduous tree that
slowly grows from 20 to 30 feet in height and has
rounded canopy with a horizontal branching pattern
(Fig. 1). With lower branches removed, it forms a
more vase-shaped patio-sized shade tree. The smooth,
attractive bark has orange-brown interlacing fissures
adding winter interest to any landscape. The white,
bell-shaped, drooping flower clusters of Japanese
Snowbell are quite showy in May to June.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Styrax japonicus
Pronunciation: STY-racks juh-PAWN-ih-kuss
Common name(s): Japanese Snowbell
Family: Styracaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; trainable as a
standard; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet
in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-605, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Styrax japonicus -- Japanese Snowbell Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrate; sinuate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: red; yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Styrax japonicus -- Japanese Snowbell Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Snowbell.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Styrax species is an excellent small patio tree
where the flowers and interesting bark can be viewed
up close; however, the flowers attract tremendous
numbers of bees and one should be cautious about
approaching the plant at that time. Japanese Snowbell
also makes a wonderful addition to the mixed
shrubbery border. Due to its small stature and vaseshape, it can make a nice street tree where overhead
space is limited. The fruit is somewhat showy and
may cause a small litter problem for a short time in
the fall. Fall leaf color is unreliable.
Snowbell prefers a peaty, acid soil that is moist
but not waterlogged. In colder areas (USDA hardiness
zone 5), locate this tree in an area protected from
winter winds. Plants grow better with a couple hours
of shade in USDA hardiness zones 7 and 8 but full
sun is fine in the North.
Cultivars include: ‘Carillon’ is hardy only to zone
6, grows about one-foot per year and has a weeping
habit, can be staked to encourage weeping habit;
‘Crystal’ - upright to fastigiate habit, black green
foliage, crisp white flowers with purple pedicels (zone
5); ‘Issai’ - cold hardy to zone 6, grows faster that
species and roots easily; ‘Pink Chimes’- pink flowers,
cold hardy to zone 6.
Propagate by softwood cuttings in summer. Seeds
eventually germinate but exhibit a double dormancy.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern. Ambrosia
beetle can attack and lead to further decline of stressed
plants.