Fact Sheet ST-607
October 1994
Styrax obassia
Figure 1. Middle-aged Fragrant Snowbell.
Fragrant Snowbell1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Styrax obassia gets its common name, Fragrant
Snowbell, from the six to eight-inch-long raceme of
fragrant, white, bell-shaped flowers produced May to
June (Fig. 1). Fragrant Snowbell is a small, 20 to 30-
foot tall, deciduous tree that is appropriate as a patio
tree where the attractive bark with orange-brown
vertical fissures can be appreciated at a close distance,
or Fragrant Snowbell can add color to the mixed
shrubbery border. The dark green leaves are not as
attractive as Japanese snowbell since they are quite
large (three to eight-inches-long) and somewhat hide
the beauty of the flowers. For this reason alone,
Japanese Snowbell is preferred between the two
species. Fragrant Snowbell does not have good fall
color and the fruit is insignificant.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Styrax obassia
Pronunciation: STY-racks oh-BAY-see-uh
Common name(s): Fragrant Snowbell
Family: Styracaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: near a deck or patio; reclamation plant;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-607, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Styrax obassia -- Fragrant Snowbell Page 2
or less identical crown forms
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown shape: oval; upright; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: dentate; entire; serrate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green; reddish
Current year twig thickness: thick
Styrax obassia -- Fragrant Snowbell Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Fragrant Snowbell.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Styrax obassia requires a well-drained, peaty, acid
soil. It often grows poorly in clay or compacted soil.
In colder areas (USDA hardiness zone 6), locate Styrax
obassia in an area protected from winter winds. Some
protection from full day sun is preferable in the
southern part of its range. Propagate by softwood
cuttings in summer.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases of major concern.