Fact Sheet ST-608
October 1994
Swietenia mahagoni
Figure 1. Mature Mahogany.
Mahogany1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This large, semievergreen tree forms a loose,
rounded canopy and casts light, dappled shade,
suitable for maintaining a lawn beneath (Fig. 1). It is
one of south Florida’s popular landscape and street
trees. Mahogany can reach 75 feet in height with a
50-foot-spread but is more often seen at 40 to 50 feet
tall and wide. The dense, strong wood of Mahogany
is quite resistant to wind-damage on properly trained
trees, making this tree all the more ideal for use as a
shade tree or street tree. Trees planted along streets or
in medians will form a beautiful canopy overhead.
The five-inch-long, brown, woody fruit capsules hang
from slender, fuzzy stalks in winter and split while
still on the tree when ripe to release winged seeds.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Swietenia mahagoni
Pronunciation: swee-TEEN-ee-uh mah-HAH-go-nye
Common name(s): Mahogany, West Indies
Mahogany
Family: Meliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; shade tree; residential street tree; tree has
been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-608, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Swietenia mahagoni -- Mahogany Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen;
semievergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: blue; brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Swietenia mahagoni -- Mahogany Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Mahogany.
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
A native of south Florida, Mahogany will grow in
full sun or partial shade on a wide range of soil types,
and is quite resistant to salt spray. Plants will respond
with rapid growth to rich, well-drained soil and regular
fertilizing. Roots can raise sidewalks and curbs when
planted only five or six feet away. Root deflectors
and barriers which direct roots to a deeper soil layer
are recommended for this and other large-growing
trees with surface root problems. Be sure that trees
are planted and maintained with a central leader to
develop a strong trunk and branch structure. Trees
often develop several upright multiple leaders which
significantly reduces the wind and storm tolerance of
any tree, including Mahogany. Prune and train the
tree while it is young to develop several major limbs
spaced several feet apart along a central trunk. Do not
allow branches to grow larger than about two-thirds
the diameter of the trunk. This will increase the life
span of Mahogany.
This and several other species of Mahogany are
used in the lumber industry for fine cabinets and
furniture due to the color, straight grain and durability
of the wood. Swietenia macrophylla is a taller tree
with a dominant, straight trunk which could be grown
in Florida and used along the streets. There were
several trees three feet in diameter at the U.S.D.A.
research station south of Miami prior to hurricane
Andrew.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Some insects can cause significant problems such
as the tent caterpillars, tip moth, webworm, scale, leaf
notcher, and leaf miner. Borers infest stressed trees.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.
Nectria infections on branches are often
predisposed by some other stress or any injury to the
tree. These infections can be seen in the branch
crotches.