Fact Sheet ST-609
October 1994
Syagrus romanzoffiana
Figure 1. Mature Queen Palm.
Queen Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This stately, single-trunked palm is crowned by a
beautiful head of glossy, bright green, soft, pinnate
leaves forming a graceful, drooping canopy (Fig. 1).
The ornamental, bright orange dates are produced in
hanging clusters and ripen during the winter months.
The dead fronds are persistent and often require
pruning to remove. It is popular in commercial or
home landscapes planted in rows on 15-foot centers to
line a street or walk, in clusters or occasionally as a
specimen. The grey trunk is ringed with old leaf
scars.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Syagrus romanzoffiana
Pronunciation: sigh-AY-gruss
roe-man-zoff-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Queen Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit)
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 50 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-609, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Syagrus romanzoffiana -- Queen Palm Page 2
Crown shape: palm; upright
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate
Leaflet venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 18 to 36 inches; 12 to 18
inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: orange
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Syagrus romanzoffiana -- Queen Palm Page 3
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Growing best in full sun, Queen Palm is most
suited for acidic, well-drained soils and shows severe
mineral deficiencies on alkaline soil. This disfigures
the palm by stunting the young leaves and can kill it.
Unfortunately, Queen Palm is frequently planted in
alkaline soil and requires regular preventive
applications of manganese and/or iron to help keep the
fronds green. Potassium deficiency is also displayed
on older fronds in well-drained soils. Quick-growing
Queen Palm responds well to ample moisture and
fertilizer and is slightly salt-tolerant. After planting
Queen Palm in the landscape, growth is rapid. This
palm is not affected by lethal yellowing disease.
Pruning off too many fronds at one time can cause
the palm to decline. Growth often slows with new
foliage aborting to display distorted leaflets. The trunk
is also very susceptible to decay. Prevent injury to the
trunk by keeping turf well away from the trunk.
Propagation is by seed and volunteers will often
appear under fruiting trees.
Pests
Palm leaf skeletonizer and scale are problems for
Queen Palm.
Diseases
Ganoderma butt rot can kill Queen Palm. It
probably enters the trunk most often through wounds
in the lower trunk and roots. There is no control for
butt rot, only prevention.