Fact Sheet ST-610
October 1994
Syringa reticulata
Figure 1. Mature Japanese Tree Lilac.
Japanese Tree Lilac1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Although a Lilac, this member of the species is
quite different in appearance than those with which
gardeners are more familiar (Fig. 1). Its upright habit
varies from symmetrical to irregular. Cultivars
including ‘Ivory Silk’ and ‘Summer Snow’ could be
used instead of the species due to the more consistent
habit and more flowers. This is a very large shrub or
small tree, reaching a height of about 20 to 30 feet
with a 15-foot-spread. The huge clusters of creamy
white flowers, borne in early summer for about two
weeks, are the main ornamental feature but lack the
fragrance of the spring-blooming Lilacs -- this Lilac’s
fragrance is more suggestive of privet. It is being
used as a street tree in some parts of the country,
particularly in areas with overhead power lines.
Japanese Tree Lilac is also popular as a garden
specimen or as an accent in a shrub border. It
deserves to be in any landscape. It provides shade and
a colorful spring show for a deck or patio area. Green
fruit clusters are somewhat showy when viewed from
close range.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Syringa reticulata
Pronunciation: sih-RING-guh reh-tick-yoo-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Japanese Tree Lilac
Family: Oleaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns
(4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; screen; trainable as a
standard; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; upright; vase shape
Crown density: dense
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-610, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Syringa reticulata -- Japanese Tree Lilac Page 2
Growth rate: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; undulate
Leaf shape: ovate
Leaf venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: summer flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green; yellow
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; showy
trunk; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thick
Syringa reticulata -- Japanese Tree Lilac Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Tree Lilac.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The tree is sold as a multi-stemmed specimen or
as a single-trunked street tree. The trunk can be
trained to grow fairly straight to 10 feet and then
branches into a stiff, upright, rounded head of foliage.
The bark is somewhat showy with prominent lenticels,
being reminiscent of Black Cherry. As with other
Lilacs, the plant as a shrub may need rejuvenation by
pruning every few years as it becomes overgrown. It
is perhaps the most pest-resistant Lilac, but that does
not mean it is pest-free. Regular irrigation during dry
spells help make this a pest-resistant tree.
Japanese Tree Lilac is tolerant of urban conditions,
growing in poor, clay or alkaline soil. The gorgeous
flowers are most showy and prolific when the tree is
located in full sun with good drainage. Plants in
partial shade can be infected with powdery mildew
which can cause some defoliation.
Available cultivars include: ‘Ivory Silk’ - grows
in USDA hardiness zones 3 to 6, upright oval, nice
flowers, borne in alternate years; ‘Summer Snow’ -
grows in USDA hardiness zones 3 to 6, upright, round
shape, persistent seed pods.
Pests
If properly located on an appropriate site, there are
few problems.
Lilac borer larvae tunnel in the branches, causing
wilting, particularly on drought-stressed trees.
Severely infested branches may break off. Remove
and destroy infested stems. Keep plants healthy with
regular waterings during dry weather and by
fertilizing.
Lilac leaf miner tunnels in the leaves in early
summer. After mining the leaf, the caterpillars emerge
and web leaves together and skeletonize the foliage.
Light infestation can be controlled by hand picking.
Scales are most often found infesting the lower
stems and often blend in with the bark. Inspect
unhealthy-looking plants for scale infestations. Spray
with horticultural oil to control overwintering stages.
Syringa reticulata -- Japanese Tree Lilac Page 4
Diseases
It is usually free of serious disease.
Bacterial blight is most serious on white flowered
selections. The young shoots develop black stripes or
one side of the shoot turns black. Spots develop on
the leaves, forming a water-soaked blotch. Young
leaves turn black and die quickly. On older shoots,
the spots enlarge more slowly. The flowers wilt and
darken. The disease is worse when wet weather
occurs as the new shoots are developing. Thin the
crown to increase air circulation. Remove and destroy
diseased shoots and avoid excessive nitrogen fertilizer.
Phytophthora blight kills stems to the ground. The
leaves turn black and shoots have brown lesions on
them.
Leaf blotch causes zoned, brown spots. The
infected area drops out, leaving a hole in the leaf.
Many fungi cause leaf spots.
Powdery mildew coats the leaves with white
powder. During wet weather, Lilacs mildew easily.
Mildew is especially severe on shade-grown plants.
Ignore late season infections.
Verticillium wilt causes wilting and premature leaf
drop. The disease may kill one, several or all the
branches. Try fertilizing regularly to help prevent
diseases.
Bacterial crown gall causes round, warty galls on
the stems near the soil line. Remove infected plants
and do not replant with a sensitive tree in the same
spot.