Fact Sheet ST-614
October 1994
Tabebuia chrysotricha
Figure 1. Middle-aged Golden Trumpet Tree.
Golden Trumpet Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
An ideal patio, specimen, or lawn tree, Golden
Trumpet Tree is often seen as a small, 15 to 25-foottall tree but can reach 50 feet, with a rounded,
spreading canopy in a wind-protected area (Fig. 1).
Sometimes evergreen but most often deciduous,
Golden Trumpet Tree has four-inch-long silvery leaves
with tan, fuzzy undersides. These leaves drop for a
short period in April to May, and it is at this time that
the trees put on their heaviest flowering display, the
trumpet-shaped, bright yellow blossoms appearing in
dense 2.5 to 8-inch-long terminal clusters. Some trees
produce a small number of flowers sporadically
throughout the warm season. The eight-inch-long seed
capsules which follow are brown, hairy, and persist on
the tree through the winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tabebuia chrysotricha
Pronunciation: tab-eh-BOO-yuh kriss-oh-TRICK-uh
Common name(s): Golden Trumpet Tree
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 35 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-614, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tabebuia chrysotricha -- Golden Trumpet Tree Page 2
Crown shape: round
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: entire; undulate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous;
semievergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Tabebuia chrysotricha -- Golden Trumpet Tree Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Golden Trumpet Tree.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Golden Trumpet Tree is very useful as a median
street tree for its vivid flower display, asymmetrical
habit and drought tolerance. Once established it can
survive on rainfall alone and produce an excellent
flower display each year. It also makes a nice tree for
planting close to the patio or deck where it will cast a
light to medium shade below the canopy.
A native of tropical America, Golden Trumpet
Tree can be grown best in full sun on any reasonably
fertile soil with moderate moisture. Trees should be
protected from frost. Although some will leaf out
following a freeze, the tree is often weakened and
grows poorly. The wood becomes brittle with age and
can break easily in strong winds, so it is not often seen
larger than about 30 feet tall. But this should not
dampen your desire to plant this wonderful tree
because it provides such enjoyment in the mean time.
Trees planted with circling roots often fall over as
they mature. Be sure to slice the root ball on
container-grown trees.
Propagation is by seed or layering.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.