Fact Sheet ST-617
October 1994
Tabebuia impetiginosa
Figure 1. Middle-aged Purple Tabebuia.
Purple Tabebuia1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This briefly deciduous tree reaches 15 to 20 feet in
height and has a fairly open canopy (Fig. 1).
Branching is often sparse allowing turf and other sun
loving plants to grow beneath the canopy. The dark
green, palmately compound, five-inch-long leaves are
joined in late winter or early spring by the showy,
trumpet-shaped blooms, appearing in dense, rose-pink
to purple, terminal panicles. Trees will have a better
form if trained to a single trunk and staked until they
are six to eight feet tall, at which time they can be
allowed to grow naturally.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tabebuia impetiginosa
Pronunciation: tab-eh-BOO-yuh
im-pet-ih-jih-NO-suh
Common name(s): Purple Tabebuia
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 12 to 18 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-617, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tabebuia impetiginosa -- Purple Tabebuia Page 2
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: purple
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; not
particularly showy; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Tabebuia impetiginosa -- Purple Tabebuia Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Purple Tabebuia.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Use this small tree in an area where any small tree
can be used. It might be best to locate it in a shrub
border or other out-of-the-way place since the canopy
is quite thin, even in full sun. It is probably not as
well suited for specimen planting as the other
Tabebuias.
Purple Tabebuia should be grown in full sun on
almost any well-drained soil but trees respond
especially well to rich soil. Established trees are
highly drought-tolerant.
Propagation is by seed, cuttings, or layering.
Plants flower at an early age.
Pest and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.