Fact Sheet ST-613
October 1994
Tabebuia caraiba
Figure 1. Mature Trumpet Tree.
Trumpet Tree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
An ideal patio, specimen, or lawn tree, the
Tabebuias are small, 15 to 25-foot tall, evergreen trees
with silvery foliage and deeply furrowed, silvery bark
on picturesque, contorted branches and trunk (Fig. 1).
The crown is usually asymmetrical with two or three
major trunks or branches dominating the crown.
During late winter and sporadically throughout the
year, they put on a brilliant display composed of a
multitude of two to three-inch-long, golden yellow,
trumpet-shaped blooms borne in terminal flower
clusters. The leaves often drop just before the flowers
appear.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tabebuia caraiba
Pronunciation: tab-eh-BOO-yuh kuh-RYE-buh
Common name(s): Trumpet Tree
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; small parking lot
islands (< 100 square feet in size); narrow tree lawns
(3-4 feet wide); specimen; residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 25 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-613, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tabebuia caraiba -- Trumpet Tree Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: entire; undulate
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: semievergreen
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: silver
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: spring flowering; very
showy; winter flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Tabebuia caraiba -- Trumpet Tree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Trumpet Tree.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
A native of tropical America, Trumpet Tree can be
grown in full sun or partial shade on any reasonably
fertile soil with moderate moisture. Trees should be
protected from frost. Although some will leaf out
following a freeze, the tree is often weakened and
grows poorly. The wood becomes brittle with age and
can break easily in strong winds but this is not usually
a problem since trees are small with an open canopy
and should not be cause to eliminate this beautiful tree
from your tree palette. To the contrary, it is one of
the most beautiful trees in flower which has a place in
most landscapes.
The pink Trumpet Tree (Tabebuia heterophylla) is
the one most suited for street tree planting since it is
reportedly more sturdy and durable than Tabebuia
caraiba. Tabebuia impetigenosa and Tabebuia
umbellata are hardy to zone 9b with pink flowers
borne on bare branches.
Propagation is by seed or layering.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.