Fact Sheet ST-618
October 1994
Tamarindus indica
Figure 1. Middle-aged Tamarind.
Tamarind1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A frost-tender, tropical, evergreen tree, Tamarind
is densely foliated with pale green, compound,
feathery leaflets which give the broad, spreading
crown a light, airy effect (Fig. 1). Tamarind may
reach heights of 65 feet and a spread of 50 feet but is
more often seen smaller. The delicate leaflets cast a
diffuse, dappled shade which will allow enough
sunlight to penetrate for a lawn to thrive beneath this
upright, dome-shaped tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tamarindus indica
Pronunciation: tam-uh-RIN-dus IN-dih-kuh
Common name(s): Tamarind
Family: Leguminosae
USDA hardiness zones: 10 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); recommended
for buffer strips around parking lots or for median strip
plantings in the highway; shade tree; specimen;
residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 40 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: even pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: elliptic (oval); oblong
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-618, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tamarindus indica -- Tamarind Page 2
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: red; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated; pod
Fruit length: 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; suited
for human consumption; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause
significant litter; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Tamarindus indica -- Tamarind Page 3
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Figure 3. Foliage of Tamarind.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The twigs and branches of Tamarind are very
resistant to wind, making it especially useful as a
shade or street tree for breezy locations. But
Tamarind has low salt-tolerance so do not locate it
close to the beach. In spring, small red and yellow
flowers appear on short racemes and are followed by
the production of brittle, brown, six-inch-long, velvety
pods. These sticky pods are filled with a sweet-sour,
dark brown paste which surrounds two or three seeds.
They normally dry up and do not become messy but
some people will undoubtedly object to the fruit
falling on sidewalks or streets. Tamarind is grown
commercially in the tropics for production of this
edible paste, which is used as an ingredient for
Worcestershire sauce, soft drinks, chutneys, and
curries.
Tamarind should be grown only in frost-free
regions in full sun on moist, fertile, sandy soil. It
survived 26 degrees for several hours in West Palm
Beach in the mid-1980s. Care should be taken in the
placement of Tamarind as the seed pods may be messy
for a short period when they drop on hard surfaces.
Also be sure to maintain a strong tree structure
including major branches well-spaced along one
central trunk.
Propagation is by seeds which germinate readily or
by cuttings. If quality fruit is desired, plants should be
air-layered, grafted, or shield-budded.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.