Fact Sheet ST-623
October 1994
Taxodium mucronatum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Montezuma Baldcypress.
Montezuma Baldcypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Montezuma Baldcypress, Mexico’s national tree, is
a huge tree in its native habitat and is pyramidal when
young with a dense crown but, like Baldcypress,
eventually develops into a broad-topped, spreading,
open specimen when mature with pendulous branches
(Fig. 1). Capable of reaching 100 to 150 feet in
height, most landscape specimens will reach this
height. The pale green, needle-like leaves are only
deciduous in the colder sections of its range, remaining
evergreen elsewhere. The trunk grows unusually thick
toward the base, even on young trees. One of the
most vivid examples of this trait is the Tule Cypress
found growing in Oaxaca, Mexico, which sports a
trunk diameter of 35 to 40 feet, or a circumference of
115 feet, while the tree itself is only 140 feet tall.
This tree has been estimated to be between 2,000 and
5,000 years old.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Taxodium mucronatum
Pronunciation: tack-SO-dee-um mew-kroe-NAY-tum
Common name(s): Montezuma Baldcypress,
Mexican-Cypress
Family: Taxodiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; screen; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 80 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal; upright
Crown density: dense
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-623, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Taxodium mucronatum -- Montezuma Baldcypress Page 2
Growth rate: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen;
semievergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Taxodium mucronatum -- Montezuma Baldcypress Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Montezuma Baldcypress.
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It provides a good vertical accent to the landscape
and could be tried in urban areas. The roots probably
will not lift sidewalks and curbs as readily as some
other species since Baldcypress does not. Its delicate,
feathery foliage affords light, dappled shade, and the
heartwood of Montezuma Baldcypress is quite strong
and resistant to rot.
Although not truly a swamp tree as other
Taxodiums, Montezuma Baldcypress still grows well
in moist soil. Its seeds will only germinate in either
water or wet soil. Montezuma Baldcypress is
relatively maintenance-free, requiring pruning only to
remove dead wood and unwanted lower branches
which persist on the tree. It maintains a desirably
straight trunk and does not form double or multiple
leaders as do many other large trees. In the only test
that I am aware of in the East, growth was stunted in
Auburn University test plots where no irrigation was
provided. Since extensive testing of this tree is
lacking in the east, plant only a few of them to
evaluate adaptability in your area.
Propagation is by seed.
Diseases
Probably no diseases are serious.