Fact Sheet ST-619
October 1994
Taxodium ascendens
Figure 1. Middle-aged Pondcypress.
Pondcypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Similar to Baldcypress in that the trunk is
perfectly straight 50 to 60 feet tall, Pondcypress has a
narrower crown, is smaller, and has a more open habit
(Fig. 1). It is found along the edges of streams and
around the edge of swampy ground where water is
standing; whereas Baldcypress is usually found along
stream banks. The bright green, awl-shaped leaves are
arranged in an upright row formation along the
branches when young, giving a somewhat stiffer and
more upright appearance than Baldcypress. The leaves
turn an attractive light brown in fall before dropping
but the bare branches and light brown, ridged bark
provide much landscape interest during the winter.
The trunk grows unusually thick toward the base, even
on young trees. This is thought to provide support for
the tree in its wet habitat. The small seeds are used
by some birds and squirrels.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Taxodium ascendens
Pronunciation: tack-SO-dee-um uh-SEN-denz
Common name(s): Pondcypress
Family: Taxodiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); reclamation
plant; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in
size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 60 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-619, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Taxodium ascendens -- Pondcypress Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: awl-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Taxodium ascendens -- Pondcypress Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Pondcypress.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although often seen at water’s edge where it will
develop "knees", or root projections, that will extend
above the water for gas exchange, Pondcypress can
also be grown in dry locations and could make an
attractive street tree for a very narrow space. Cypress
knees do not generally form on these drier sites. The
"knees" do not form as readily as on Baldcypress, even
on wet sites. It provides a good vertical accent to the
landscape and should be used more often in urban
areas. The roots do not appear to lift sidewalks and
curbs as readily as some other species. Its delicate
foliage affords light, dappled shade, and the heartwood
is quite strong and resistant to rot. However, most
lumber available at lumber yards today is sapwood and
is not resistant to rot.
Pondcypress is ideal for wet locations, such as its
native habitat of stream banks and mucky soils, but the
trees will also grow quite well on almost any soil,
including clay, silt and sand, except alkaline soils with
a pH above 7.5. Its drought-avoidance mechanism
allows it to drop leaves in extended dry periods but
little harm appears to come to the tree. Pondcypress is
relatively maintenance-free, requiring pruning only to
remove dead wood and unwanted lower branches
which persist on the tree. It maintains a desirably
straight trunk without pruning and does not form
double or multiple leaders as do many large trees.
The cultivar ‘Prairie Sentinel’ is narrower than the
species.
Propagation is by seed.
Diseases
No diseases are serious.
Twig blight is caused by a weak pathogen and is
usually present on dead or dying tissue. When the tree
is stressed the fungus can kill branch tips. Dead tips
can be pruned off. Do not let dead or diseased
branches remain on the tree. Keep trees healthy with
regular fertilization.