Fact Sheet ST-620
October 1994
Taxodium distichum
Figure 1. Middle-aged Baldcypress.
Baldcypress1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Narrowly to broadly pyramidal when young,
Baldcypress, the state tree of Louisiana, eventually
develops into a broad-topped, spreading, open
specimen when mature (Fig. 1). Capable of reaching
100 to 150 feet in height, most landscape specimens
are rarely seen in this open form because they are
usually much younger and shorter. Trees grow at a
moderately fast rate, reaching 40 to 50 feet in about 15
to 25 years. Although it is native to wetlands along
running streams, growth is often faster on moist, welldrained soil. The pale green, needle-like leaves turn a
brilliant coppery red in fall before dropping, but the
bare branches and reddish gray, peeling bark provide
much landscape interest during the winter. The trunk
grows unusually thick toward the base, even on young
trees. The small seeds are used by some birds and
squirrels.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Taxodium distichum
Pronunciation: tack-SO-dee-um DISS-tick-um
Common name(s): Baldcypress
Family: Taxodiaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 10 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; screen; shade tree; small parking lot islands (<
100 square feet in size); specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-620, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Taxodium distichum -- Baldcypress Page 2
Availability: generally available in many areas within
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 80 feet
Spread: 25 to 35 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal; upright
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: brown
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; attracts squirrels
and other mammals; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Taxodium distichum -- Baldcypress Page 3
Breakage: resistant
Figure 3. Foliage of Baldcypress.
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.46
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Although often seen at water’s edge where it will
develop "knees", or root projections, that will extend
above the water, Baldcypress can also be grown in dry
locations and makes an attractive lawn, street, or shade
tree. Cypress knees do not generally form on these
drier sites. Cities from Charlotte, NC, Dallas, TX to
Tampa, FL currently use it as a street tree and it
should be used more extensively throughout its range
in urban landscapes. It provides a good vertical accent
to the landscape and should be used more often in
urban areas. Baldcypress can be clipped into a formal
hedge, creating a wonderful soft screen.
Surprisingly, the roots do not appear to lift
sidewalks and curbs as readily as some other species.
Its delicate, feathery foliage affords light, dappled
shade, and the heartwood of Baldcypress is quite
resistant to rot. However, most lumber available at
lumber yards today is sapwood and is not resistant to
rot.
Baldcypress is ideal for wet locations, such as its
native habitat of stream banks and mucky soils, but the
trees will also grow remarkably well on almost any
soil, including heavy, compacted, or poorly-drained
muck, except alkaline soils with a pH above 7.5.
Locate where the sun will strike the tree on all sides
for best symmetrical development. Baldcypress is
relatively maintenance-free, requiring pruning only to
remove dead wood and unwanted lower branches
which persist on the tree. It maintains a desirably
straight trunk and a moderately dense canopy and does
not form double or multiple leaders as do many other
large trees.
The cultivar ‘Monarch of Illinois’ has a very widespreading form and ‘Shawnee Brave’ has a narrow,
pyramidal form, 15 to 20 feet wide. ‘Pendens’ has
drooping branchlets and large cones. Taxodium
distichum var. nutans (Taxodium ascendens) is native
to wet, boggy areas with standing water, whereas
Taxodium distichum is more common along streams.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Bagworms can defoliate portions of the tree.
Mites can be particularly troublesome in dry summers
without irrigation, causing early leaf browning and
defoliation in mid to late summer.
Diseases
Twig blight is caused by a weak pathogen and is
usually present on dead or dying tissue. When the tree
is stressed the fungus can kill branch tips. Dead tips
can be pruned off. Do not let dead or diseased
branches remain on the tree. Keep trees healthy with
regular fertilization.