Fact Sheet ST-624
October 1994
Taxus baccata
Figure 1. Middle-aged English Yew.
English Yew1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
English Yew is most easily recognized in its
trimmed form as dense hedges and screens, or shaped
into topiary, but this dark green evergreen makes an
outstanding specimen (Fig. 1). If left to grow
naturally, it reaches 20 to 25 feet in height with a
spread of 15 to 20 feet in most situations. Plants grow
slowly and have been known to reach heights of 50
feet. The shiny, very dark green leaves are 0.5 to 1.5
inches long. The attractive, reddish-brown trunk is
often fluted and can become quite massive. The
inconspicuous flowers appear in spring and are
followed by the production of small, showy, red,
fleshy fruits which contain one of the most poisonous
seeds known, capable of poisoning both man and
livestock. Taxine, the toxic chemical, is found in the
leaves, bark, and hard part of the seed.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Taxus baccata
Pronunciation: TACK-sus back-AY-tuh
Common name(s): English Yew
Family: Taxaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; near a deck or patio; screen;
trainable as a standard; specimen; Christmas tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-624, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Taxus baccata -- English Yew Page 2
or less identical crown forms
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see; parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; needle leaf
evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; very showy trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Taxus baccata -- English Yew Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of English Yew.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Yew is used in the tree form primarily to create a
screen, to develop into a topiary or to plant as a large
clipped specimen on a large estate or other large
landscape. The dense crown makes it especially suited
for a screen provided plants are located in full-day sun
and they are given plenty of room to spread. If lateral
space is limited, select one of the narrow, upright
cultivars.
English Yew should be grown in full sun on welldrained, moist soil, acid or alkaline.
Propagation is by seeds (with difficulty), cuttings,
or grafting.
Pests
Taxus mealybug, black vine weevil, Taxus scale,
and yew-gall midge can cause some damage.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.