Fact Sheet ST-625
October 1994
Tecoma stans
Figure 1. Mature Yellow-Elder.
Yellow-Elder1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This spreading, fast-growing evergreen shrub or
small tree is noted for its brilliant, bell-shaped, fragrant
yellow flowers (Fig. 1). Reaching full bloom in fall,
Yellow-Elder produces some flowers with each flush
of new growth and therefore has some color most of
the year.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tecoma stans
Pronunciation: teh-KOE-muh stanz
Common name(s): Yellow-Elder, Yellow
Trumpet-Flower
Family: Bignoniaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size);
wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree
lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer strips
around parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; narrow tree lawns (3-4
feet wide); specimen; residential street tree; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 20 to 30 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen;
semievergreen
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-625, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tecoma stans -- Yellow-Elder Page 2
Fall characteristic: not showy
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: very showy; year round
flowering (Fig. 3)
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: 6 to 12 inches; 3 to 6 inches
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Tecoma stans -- Yellow-Elder Page 3
Figure 3. Flower of Yellow-Elder.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
While sometimes trained to a single trunk,
Yellow-Elder is most often used as a specimen or
mixed into a shrub border. The somewhat weedy
growth requires pruning to control shape, but it is
worth the effort due to the brilliant flowers. Its small
stature allows it to be used beneath power lines as a
street tree.
Growing in full sun on any well-drained soil,
Yellow-Elder survives on rain alone making it wellsuited to naturalized and low-maintenance gardens. It
would also make a nice patio tree and is suited for
planting in parking lot islands and medians. The
dropping fruit can cause a slight litter problem.
Plants grow easily from seed and can also be
propagated from cuttings. Seedlings are easily
transplanted and will bloom within two years.
Pests
Yellow-Elder is relatively pest-free with chewing
insects and scale being only minor problems.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.