Fact Sheet ST-628
October 1994
Thrinax morrisii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Key Thatch Palm.
Key Thatch Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American palm slowly grows 20
to 30 feet tall, its smooth, slender trunk topped with 3
(Fig. 1).5-foot-wide, beautiful, green and silver fronds.
The fronds are a shimmering silver/white underneath
and are a source for thatch. The insignificant white
spring flowers are followed by small, round, fleshy
white fruits.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Thrinax morrisii
Pronunciation: THRY-nacks more-ISS-ee-eye
Common name(s): Key Thatch Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 20 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-628, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Thrinax morrisii -- Key Thatch Palm Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 18 to 36 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: white
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: high
Thrinax morrisii -- Key Thatch Palm Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This palm is small enough to be popular in
residential landscapes. It is often planted as a single
specimen or in groups of three to accent an area. Due
to the coarse texture, they make a nice entryway palm
planted to attract attention to the front door of a
building. It often looks best planted in a mulched area
or in a bed with a low-growing ground cover.
Key Thatchpalm should be grown in full sun or
partial shade and is highly drought- and salt-tolerant,
making it ideal for seaside applications.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern.