Fact Sheet ST-630
October 1994
Thuja plicata
Figure 1. Mature Giant Arborvitae.
Giant Arborvitae1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native western North American tree, GiantCedar can reach 180 to 200 feet in height in some
areas of the Northwest but is more often seen at 50 to
70 feet in height with a spread of 15 to 25 feet (Fig.
1). Forming an upright pyramidal silhouette with
strongly horizontal branches, Giant-Cedar is an
evergreen with fragrant, dark green, delicate needles
which generously clothe the branches, casting dense
shade beneath the tree. The insignificant yellow
flowers are followed by small, half-inch cones which
seem a little out-of-place on such a large tree.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Thuja plicata
Pronunciation: THOO-yuh ply-KAY-tuh
Common name(s): Giant Arborvitae, Giant-Cedar,
Western Redcedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 70 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: columnar; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-630, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Thuja plicata -- Giant Arborvitae Page 2
Texture: fine
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: unknown (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: ovate; scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: elongated
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; should be grown with a single leader; very
showy trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.32
Thuja plicata -- Giant Arborvitae Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Giant Arborvitae.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Tolerating shearing quite well, Giant-Cedar is
ideal for use as a hedge or screen, or a specimen for a
large landscape. The wood of this tree is
commercially used in North America for the
manufacture of roof shingles, deck boards, and siding
and the split trunks were often used by Indians for
making totem poles or canoes. Due to its narrow
crown, it works well close to buildings where soil is
frequently alkaline and drainage is poor.
Giant-Cedar naturally occurs on river banks,
swamps, and even bogs so should be grown in full sun
or partial shade on moist, well-drained, fertile soil, and
prefers a moist atmosphere. Apparently pH adaptable,
growth is stunted on dry soils. Provide irrigation
during the summer or locate in an area with moist soil.
A few of the many cultivars include: ‘Atrovirens’,
excellent shining green foliage; ‘Canadian Gold’,
golden foliage; and ‘Fastigiata’ (‘Hogan’), dense
columnar silhouette, very resistant to bagworms - they
do not appear to infest this cultivar as much as the
species.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern but may
be occasionally bothered by bagworm.