Fact Sheet ST-629
October 1994
Thuja occidentalis
Figure 1. Middle-aged White-Cedar.
White-Cedar1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This slow-growing tree reaches 25 to 40 feet in
height and spreads to about 10 to 12 feet wide,
preferring a wet or moist, rich soil (Fig. 1).
Transplanting is moderately easy if plants are rootpruned and either balled and burlapped or potted.
White-Cedar likes high humidity and tolerates wet
soils and some drought. The foliage turns brownish in
winter, especially on cultivars with colored foliage and
on exposed sites open to the wind.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Thuja occidentalis
Pronunciation: THOO-yuh ock-sih-den-TAY-liss
Common name(s): White-Cedar, Arborvitae,
Northern White-Cedar
Family: Cupressaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; reclamation plant; screen; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 40 feet
Spread: 10 to 12 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-629, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Thuja occidentalis -- White-Cedar Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: scale-like
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.31
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Thuja occidentalis -- White-Cedar Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of White-Cedar.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Best used as a screen or hedge planted on 8 to 10-
foot-centers. There are better specimen plants but it
can be placed at the corner of a building or other area
to soften a view. Many of the natural stands in the
United States have been cut. Some remain in isolated
areas along rivers throughout the East.
White-Cedar has given rise to many cultivars,
many of which are shrubs. Cultivars include: ‘Booth
Globe’ - low, rounded with a flat top; ‘Compacta’ -
dense and compact; ‘Compacta Erecta’ - semi-dwarf,
pyramidal; ‘Douglasi Pyramidalis’ - dense, columnar;
‘Emerald Green’ - good winter color; ‘Ericoides’ -
dwarf, brownish foliage in winter; ‘Fastigiata’ -
narrow, columnar; ‘Globosa’ - dense, rounded; ‘Hetz
Junior’ - dwarf, wider than it is tall; ‘Hetz Midget’ -
slow grower, quite dwarf, rounded; ‘Hovey’ - low and
rounded; ‘Little Champion’ - globe shaped; ‘Lutea’ -
yellow foliage; ‘Nigra’ - dark green foliage in winter,
pyramidal; ‘Pumila’ (Little Gem) - rounded, dwarf;
‘Pyramidalis’ - narrow pyramidal form; ‘Rheingold’ -
rounded form with yellow to bronze new growth;
‘Rosenthalli’ - dense, pyramidal; ‘Techny’ - pyramidal,
dark green, hardy; ‘Umbraculifera’ - flat topped;
‘Wareana’ - low and dense, pyramidal; ‘Woodwardii’ -
rounded and spreading.
Pests
Arborvitae leaf miner mines out the leaf tips,
causing them to turn brown. Translucent areas are
seen where the miner has been active.
Scales of several types infest the stems and
foliage. Sprays of horticultural oil control
overwintering stages.
Mites cause yellowing and speckling of the
foliage. The mites are seldom noticed because they
are so small.
Bagworms can devour large quantities of foliage
very quickly.
Diseases
Leaf blight causes brown spots on the leaves in
late spring. The affected foliage appears scorched,
then drops.