Fact Sheet ST-633
October 1994
Tibouchina urvilleana
Figure 1. Middle-aged Princess-Flower.
Princess-Flower1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This sprawling, evergreen shrub or small
ornamental tree ranges from 10 to 15 feet (20 feet with
proper training) in height (Fig. 1). It can be trimmed
to any size and still put on a vivid, year-long flower
display. The dark green, velvety, four to six-inch-long
leaves have several prominent longitudinal veins
instead of the usual one, and are often edged in red.
Large, royal purple blossoms, flaring open to five
inches, are held on terminal panicles above the foliage,
creating a spectacular sight when in full bloom. Some
flowers are open throughout the year but they are
especially plentiful from May to January. PrincessFlower is ideal for the mixed shrubbery border or used
in small groupings to compound the impact of bloomtime.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tibouchina urvilleana
Pronunciation: tib-oo-KYE-nuh er-vill-ee-AY-nuh
Common name(s): Princess-Flower
Family: Melastomataceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; espalier;
hedge; near a deck or patio; screen; trainable as a
standard; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-633, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tibouchina urvilleana -- Princess-Flower Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: ciliate; entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaf venation: bowed; parallel
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: purple
Flower characteristics: very showy; year round
flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Tibouchina urvilleana -- Princess-Flower Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Princess-Flower.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Princess-Flower requires full sun for best
flowering and will thrive on any well-drained soil
when regularly watered. Its growth habit is somewhat
weedy, requiring training and pruning to develop and
maintain it as a tree. It can be trained as a standard or
espaliered against a west-facing wall receiving at least
five hours of full sun. It can also be trained on a
trellis or arbor as a vine. Pinching new growth helps
increase branching and will enhance the flower
display.
Tibouchina granulosa grows larger (15 to 20 feet
tall and wide) and is easier to train into a tree.
Propagation is by cuttings.
Pests
Some of its pests are scales and nematodes.
Diseases
Mushroom root rot in soil which is kept too wet.