Fact Sheet ST-637
October 1994
Tilia cordata
Figure 1. Middle-aged Littleleaf Linden.
Littleleaf Linden1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Littleleaf Linden grows 80 feet tall and can spread
40 to 50 feet, but is normally seen 40 to 50 feet tall
with a 35 to 40-foot-spread in most landscapes (Fig.
1). This tree has a slower growth rate than other
Lindens but has a dense pyramidal to oval crown
which casts deep shade. Architects enjoy using the
tree due to its predictably symmetrical shape.
Littleleaf Linden is a prolific bloomer, the small,
fragrant flowers appearing in late June and into July.
Many bees are attracted to the flowers, and the dried
flowers persist on the tree for some time. Japanese
beetles often skeletonize Linden foliage, in certain
areas in the northern part of its range. Defoliation can
be nearly total and mature trees can be killed by
severe infestations. Planting Linden in areas with
severe infestations of this pest may not be wise.
However, at least one reference reports that defoliation
by Japanese beetles is common, but control is seldom
needed.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tilia cordata
Pronunciation: TILL-ee-uh kor-DAY-tuh
Common name(s): Littleleaf Linden
Family: Tiliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized tree lawns
(4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer strips around
parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; screen; shade tree; specimen; sidewalk cutout
(tree pit); residential street tree; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-637, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tilia cordata -- Littleleaf Linden Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
DESCRIPTION
Height: 60 to 70 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: cordate; orbiculate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown; tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Tilia cordata -- Littleleaf Linden Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Littleleaf Linden.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Small lateral branches arise from the trunk in an
upswept curve but quickly bend gracefully toward the
ground. Multiple trunks and upright, large-diameter
branches develop on some trees and they may be
poorly attached to the trunk. These can initiate decay
or, as with other trees with the same defect, they can
fall from the tree. Be sure to purchase and train
Linden to one central trunk with well-spaced, smalldiameter lateral branches. The cultivars ‘Glenleven’,
‘Greenspire’ and ‘June Bride’ have been developed for
their very straight trunk. Linden may sprout from the
base and these sprouts will have to be removed from
time to time.
The tree grows in sun or partial shade, will
tolerate alkaline soil if it is moist, and it transplants
well. It is not particularly tolerant of drought,
scorching at the leaf margins in summer drought. But
this apparently does little long-term harm. It is more
tolerant of heat and compact soil than American
Basswood. Many communities plant Linden along the
streets due to its rapid growth rate and dense,
symmetrical crown but littleleaf Linden is sensitive to
road salt. There are a number of cultivars with a
variety of habits.
The wood of Linden is clear white, soft and often
used for drawer sides in inexpensive furniture.
Though not as soft as balsa wood, it sands poorly and
is difficult to finish.
There are several cultivars: ‘Chancellor’ - upright
when young but becoming pyramidal, fast growth,
with a straight, single trunk: ‘Glenleven’ - conical
(pyramidal), fast growth, straight trunk, more open
canopy than species; ‘Greenspire’ - straight trunk and
radially produced branches-may be the leastmaintenance cultivar; ‘June Bride’ - pyramidal, glossy
leaves, very slow growing, profuse flowering;
‘Pyramidalis’ - widely pyramidal; ‘Rancho’ - narrow,
upright growth habit, very small, fine textured leaf - a
beautiful tree; ‘Sterling’ is supposed to resist Japanese
beetles.
Pests
Despite susceptibility to various insects and
diseases, control is usually not needed except for
Japanese beetle.
Japanese beetles often skeletonize Linden foliage,
in certain areas in the northern part of its range.
Tilia cordata -- Littleleaf Linden Page 4
Defoliation can be nearly total and mature trees can be
killed by severe infestations. Planting Linden in areas
with severe infestations of this pest is not recommended.
Aphids can be a problem on Linden causing the
production of honeydew. This is more of a nuisance
than a life threatening problem.
Several caterpillars feed on Linden. Have the
insect identified then apply the appropriate control, if
needed. Bacillus thuringiensis will not be effective
against sawfly larvae. Fall webworm nests can be
pruned out when still small.
Lace bugs cause discoloration of the leaves. The
insects are found on the undersides of the leaves, and
can cause some early defoliation but are otherwise
harmless.
Spider mites cause leaves to become stippled and
yellowed. The mites are usually not discovered until
there is a significant infestation.
Diseases
No diseases are usually serious.
Anthracnose caused by Gnomonia tiliae causes
elongated light brown areas next to the veins. The
spots may be anywhere on the leaf but are most often
near the tip. The spots are bordered by a distinct
black band. Severe infections defoliate the tree. The
disease does not require chemical controls every year
but repeated severe infections may justify spraying.
Leaf blight causes leaves to brown and fall. The
early symptoms are round, brown spots with dark
borders. The spots become numerous leading to leaf
browning and drop.
Several fungi cause cankers and dieback on
branches and trunks. Remove infected branches as
they occur and avoid wounding the tree. Fertilizing
infected trees may help.
Powdery mildew forms a white coating on the
leaves but is usually not serious and does not require
treatment.
Verticillium wilt causes dieback and death of
individual branches or the entire tree. Keep trees
healthy with a regular fertilizer program to help
prevent the disease.