Fact Sheet ST-642
October 1994
Tilia tomentosa
Figure 1. Young Silver Linden.
Silver Linden1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Rapidly growing 50 to 70 feet in height with a
spread of 40 to 60 feet, Silver Linden could be quite
popular for use as a shade, specimen, or street tree
(Fig. 1). A deciduous tree, Silver Linden has a
pyramidal form when young but develops into an
upright silhouette with an oval canopy and often has
multiple trunks. Casting dense shade below the tree,
the four to five-inch-long dark green leaves are bright
silver and fuzzy below, causing the trees to almost
appear as if they are shimmering with each little
breeze. The leaves turn yellow before dropping in
autumn. In early summer, the trees are perfumed with
extremely fragrant clusters of small, yellow/white
blossoms but these are difficult to see due to the dense
cover of the large leaves. The flowers attract large
numbers of bees and a small, egg-shaped fruit follows
the blooms.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tilia tomentosa
Pronunciation: TILL-ee-uh toe-men-TOE-suh
Common name(s): Silver Linden
Family: Tiliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4B through 8A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
shade tree; specimen; residential street tree; tree has
been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-642, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tilia tomentosa -- Silver Linden Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 50 to 70 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; round; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: cordate; orbiculate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Tilia tomentosa -- Silver Linden Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Silver Linden.
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree is large and needs plenty of room to
develop. Plant it as a specimen or shade tree on a
commercial property where there is plenty of soil
space available for root expansion. Well-suited for
large tree lawns along streets and for large parking lot
islands. Be prepared to remove sprouts periodically
from the base of the trunk.
Silver Linden should be grown in full sun on
moist, well-drained soil, acid or slightly alkaline. This
tree is moderately tolerant of pollution, soil
compaction, heat, and drought making it an ideal street
or shade tree. It appears to tolerate drought better than
other Lindens. Some report that it is risky to
transplant in the fall. Irrigate regularly following
planting.
Available cultivars include: ‘Green Mountain’, a
rapidly-growing form with a dense canopy and is
reportedly resistant to Japanese beetle and gypsy moth;
‘Princeton’ reportedly compartmentalizes decay bettern
than others; ‘Sterling’, reportedly resistant to gypsy
moth and Japanese beetle; and ‘Wandell’, broadly
pyramidal form, leaves reportedly resistant to Japanese
beetle.
Propagation is most often done by cuttings, or by
seed with difficulty (can take two years to germinate).
Pests
Mainly aphids are problems although European
Linden bark borer, Linden borer, walnut lace bug,
caterpillars, Basswood leaf miner, elm sawfly, scales,
and Linden mites can all be serious problems. The
aphids will secrete a honeydew which will result in a
dark soot over objects below the tree, such as parked
cars or lawn furniture.
Reportedly less susceptible to Japanese beetles
than other Lindens due to the pubescense on the under
side of the leaves.
Diseases
Anthracnose, leaf blight, canker, leaf spots,
powdery mildew, and verticillium wilt can be
occasional problems on Lindens.