Fact Sheet ST-634
October 1994
Tilia americana
Figure 1. Mature American Linden.
American Linden1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Most often seen at 40 to 50 feet in height with a
spread of 35 to 40 feet, American Linden or Basswood
is capable of reaching 80 to 100 feet or more (Fig. 1).
The tree is pyramidal when young but develops into a
striking specimen with an upright, oval canopy atop a
tall, straight trunk. The lower branches remain on the
tree and gently drape toward the ground before
sweeping up in a gentle curve. The four to eight-inchlong, heart-shaped leaves are dark green throughout
the year fading only to pale green or yellow before
dropping in autumn. In June, the trees produce
abundant, two to three-inch-wide clusters of very
fragrant, light yellow blooms which are extremely
attractive to bees, who make a delicious honey from
their harvests. The small, grey nut which is later
produced will persist on the tree until midwinter. The
trunk can grow to six feet or more across on mature
specimens.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tilia americana
Pronunciation: TILL-ee-uh uh-mair-ih-KAY-nuh
Common name(s): American Linden, Basswood,
American Basswood
Family: Tiliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 3 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: hedge; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); shade
tree; specimen; residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 80 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-634, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tilia americana -- American Linden Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: cordate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: tan
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; green
Current year twig thickness: medium
Wood specific gravity: 0.37
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Tilia americana -- American Linden Page 3
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Figure 3. Foliage of American Linden.
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This tree is large and needs plenty of room to
develop. Branches should be well-spaced along a
central trunk to allow for development of a durable
structure. Left unpruned, weak crotches with
embedded bark can develop but the wood is flexible
so branches usually do not break from the tree. Be
sure main branches remain less than about half the
diameter of the trunk. Plant it as a specimen or shade
tree on a commercial property where there is plenty of
soil space available for root expansion. Be prepared to
remove sprouts periodically from the base of the trunk.
A North American native tree, American Linden
prefers moist, fertile soils, acid or slightly alkaline, in
full sun or partial shade. It is more shade-tolerant than
many other large trees. The leaves will show
appreciable browning and scorching after a particularly
dry season, but the tree appears fine the following
year. It is often found growing along moist stream
banks but tolerates some drought. Best located in
moist sites.
The cultivar ‘Redmond’ grows 65 to 75 feet tall
and has a pyramidal shape with upright branches and
shiny leaves, drought-tolerant; ‘Fastigiata’ is narrowly
pyramidal with fragrant yellow flowers; ‘Legend’ is
resistant to leaf rust, pyramidal, grows with a single,
straight trunk, and upright, well-spaced branches.
These can all be used in large tree lawns along streets.
Many taxonimists lump Tilia carolinana, Tilia
heterophylla, Tilia floridana, and Tilia georgiana
together with Tilia americana.
Propagation is by seed, cuttings, or grafting.
Pests
Mainly aphids, although Japanese beetle, European
Linden bark borer, Linden borer, walnut lace bug,
caterpillars, Basswood leaf miner, elm sawfly, scales
and Linden mite can all be troublesome problems.
The aphids will secrete a honeydew which will result
in a dark soot over objects below the tree, such as
parked cars or lawn furniture.
Diseases
Anthracnose, leaf blight, canker, leaf spots,
powdery mildew, and verticillium wilt are some
diseases than can infect American Linden. Leaf rust
can cause some defoliation.