Fact Sheet ST-643
October 1994
Torreya nucifera
Figure 1. Young Japanese Torreya.
Japanese Torreya1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Japanese Torreya is a very slow-growing
evergreen which will eventually reach 40 feet tall in
the home landscape and is capable of reaching 75 feet
in the wild (Fig. 1). With a pyramidal silhouette and
long, graceful branches clothed with glossy, dark green
leaves, Japanese Torreya provides medium to deep
shade beneath its canopy. The stiff, 1.25-inch leaves
give off a pungent aroma when crushed. The 1.5-inchlong, green, edible fruits follow the insignificant
flowers and persist on the tree, requiring two years
before maturity when they ripen and split apart. The
seeds are very oily.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Torreya nucifera
Pronunciation: TOR-ee-uh noo-SIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Japanese Torreya,
Japanese-Nutmeg
Family: Taxaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; screen; specimen; no proven urban
tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 15 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-643, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Torreya nucifera -- Japanese Torreya Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: none, or difficult to see
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; suited for human
consumption; inconspicuous and not showy; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; showy trunk; should be
grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Torreya nucifera -- Japanese Torreya Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Torreya.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Japanese Torreya should be grown in shaded areas
on rich, moist soil. In the colder regions of its range it
should be grown where it can be protected from harsh
winter winds. It is not widely available but could be
produced and planted as specimens in home and
commercial landscapes.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.