Fact Sheet ST-645
October 1994
Trachycarpus fortunei
Figure 1. Mature Windmill Palm.
Windmill Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
The erect, single trunk of Windmill Palm is
covered with dense, brown, hairlike fibers, and the
three-foot-wide, fan-shaped fronds extend from 1 (Fig.
1).5-foot-long, rough-edged petioles. The trunk
appears to be wrapped in burlap. A very slowgrowing palm, Windmill Palm can reach 40 feet in
height but is often seen much smaller, 10 to 20 feet
tall. Windmill Palm works well as a framing tree,
accent, specimen, patio or urn subject. It is ideal for
use as an accent in a shady shrub border or by a front
entryway. It does well in confined areas and is hardy
to 10-degrees F. or lower.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Trachycarpus fortunei
Pronunciation: tray-kee-KAR-pus FOR-too-nee-eye
Common name(s): Windmill Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; suitable for
growing indoors; near a deck or patio; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 20 feet
Spread: 6 to 10 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: slow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-645, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Trachycarpus fortunei -- Windmill Palm Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 18 to 36 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance;
inconspicuous and not showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Trachycarpus fortunei -- Windmill Palm Page 3
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Windmill Palm should be grown in shade or
partial shade on fertile soil to look its best, but it is
also tolerant of full sun on well-drained soils when
given ample moisture in the northern part of its range.
Plants should be watered faithfully. Protection from
harsh winds will minimize leaf tearing, but plants can
be used successfully close to the shore, being quite
tolerant of salt and wind. There are fine examples of
mass plantings where palms are spaced six to 10 feet
apart around a patio or sitting area. They have also
been used very successfully lining an entry walk to a
large building. This adds a formal elegance to any
structure, especially one with a glass facade.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Scales and palm aphids are pests of Windmill
Palm.
Diseases
Windmill Palm may be infected by root rot,
moderately susceptible to lethal yellowing disease, and
leaf spots.