Fact Sheet ST-646
October 1994
Tsuga canadensis
Figure 1. Middle-aged Canadian Hemlock.
Canadian Hemlock1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Canadian Hemlock may be one of the most
beautiful conifers, with its soft green needles attached
to gently arching branches, often reaching to the
ground (Fig. 1). Specimen trees look their best with
lower branches left on and touching the ground. The
strong, conical form is supported by one, straight
central trunk. Hardy to USDA hardiness zone 3,
Canadian Hemlock will grow 50 to 70 feet tall and 30
feet wide, but is tolerant of shearing and can be used
for large or small, sheared screens. Unfortunately,
infestations of woolly adelgid have been severe in
Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania (and other areas)
and this may limit their use in certain areas.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Tsuga canadensis
Pronunciation: TSOO-guh kan-uh-DEN-sis
Common name(s): Canadian Hemlock, Eastern
Hemlock
Family: Pinaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; hedge; screen; shade tree; specimen; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 70 feet
Spread: 30 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: pyramidal
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-646, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Tsuga canadensis -- Canadian Hemlock Page 2
Crown density: moderate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: slow
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: linear
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen; fragrant;
needle leaf evergreen
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: green; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem; persistent on the tree
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.40
Tsuga canadensis -- Canadian Hemlock Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Canadian Hemlock.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: loam; sand; acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Hemlock transplants well balled-in-burlap and will
grow in moderately dry or moist, acidic soil but
prefers moist, well-drained sites. Root rot and bark
splitting are common on sites which are constantly
wet. Some die-back can be expected after
transplanting if irrigation is not managed just right.
Best growth is in partial shade in the mountainous
valleys but specimens grow well in full sun in the
middle and northern part of their range. Perfect
beneath other trees or in a large, mulched bed where
soil is cool and some sun sneaks through during
portions of the day. Canadian Hemlock is not for
planting in a lawn in competition with turf. Plants
grown in full shade will be thin and will not produce
the screening effect so characteristic of Hemlock in
full sun or partial shade. This is a picky plant but
well worth the extra effort to cultivate it.
Cultivars include: ‘Bennett’ - globose habit,
branches weeping at the tips, dark green, grow in
partial shade, three-foot height and spread; ‘Sargentii’
is a dwarf, weeping mound form commonly available
that will grow 6 to 12 feet tall (in about 80 years) and
10 to 20 feet wide; ‘White Gentsch’ - a rounded,
flattened dwarf, the foliage is white at the tips, four
feet high and wide.
Pests
Canadian Hemlock can be infested by woolly
adelgid, scales, weevils, bagworm, mites, sapsucker
woodpecker. Woolly adelgid and scale infestations
can devastate a planting.
Diseases
This tree may have problems with needle rust,
cankers, non-parasitic bark splitting on heavy, poorly
drained soil.