Fact Sheet ST-648
October 1994
Ulmus alata
Figure 1. Young Winged Elm.
Winged Elm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Usually seen at 40 to 50 feet high, Winged Elm
can reach 90 feet in height in the woods with a 30 to
40-foot spread (Fig. 1). Canopy form is variable from
pyramidal to vase or rounded. A North American
native, this fast-growing deciduous tree is quickly
identified by the corky, winglike projections which
appear on opposite sides of twigs and branches.
Branches rise through the crown, then bend in a
sweeping manner toward the ground. The size of the
wings varies greatly from one tree to another.
Because it is found growing in wet sites as well as
dry, rocky ridges it is a very adaptable tree for urban
planting.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ulmus alata
Pronunciation: UL-mus uh-LAY-tuh
Common name(s): Winged Elm
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 45 to 70 feet
Spread: 30 to 40 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval; pyramidal; upright; vase shape
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-648, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ulmus alata -- Winged Elm Page 2
Crown density: moderate
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches; less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; inconspicuous
and not showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Ulmus alata -- Winged Elm Page 3
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
Figure 3. Foliage of Winged Elm.
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Winged Elm will easily adapt to full sun or partial
shade, growing relatively quickly on any soil. It is an
extremely sturdy and adaptable tree and is well-suited
as a shade or street tree. It grows very well in urban
areas and is suited to parking lot islands and other
confined soil spaces. It must be pruned regularly at an
early age to eliminate double and multiple trunks.
Select branches which form a wide angle with the
trunk, eliminating those with narrow crotches. Strive
to produce a central trunk with major lateral limbs
spaced along the trunk. This trunk will not be straight
(unless it is staked) but this is fine. Purchase trees
with good form in the nursery and be selective since
form varies greatly from one tree to the next.
It is not an easy tree to train and prune, requiring
perhaps three or four prunings in the first several years
after seed germination. Trees look very open and
lanky following proper pruning and this may be one
reason the tree has not been very popular with nursery
operators, architects, and urban foresters. But after
this initial training period, trees fill in nicely to make a
well-adapted, beautiful shade tree.
Propagation is by seed which, when sown
immediately after harvest, germinate quickly and
easily.
Pests and Diseases
The biggest problem is Dutch elm disease which
can kill trees. To protect the community from
widespread tree loss, do not plant a large number of
these trees. Some trees are susceptible to powdery
mildew, causing varying degrees of leaf color changes
in fall, right before leaves drop. Mites can yellow the
foliage but usually cause no permanent damage. Scale
insects can infest Winged Elm along branches. Scale
infestations are often missed due to the thick, corky
bark along the twigs.