Fact Sheet ST-649
October 1994
Ulmus americana
Figure 1. Middle-aged American Elm.
American Elm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This native North American tree grows quickly
when young, forming a broad or upright, vase-shaped
silhouette, 80 to 100 feet high and 60 to 120 feet wide
(Fig. 1). Trunks on older trees could reach to seven
feet across. The six-inch-long, deciduous leaves are
dark green throughout the year, fading to yellow
before dropping in fall. In early spring, before the
new leaves unfold, the rather inconspicuous, small,
green flowers appear on pendulous stalks. These
blooms are followed by green, wafer-like seedpods
which mature soon after flowering is finished and the
seeds are quite popular with both birds and wildlife.
American Elm must be at least 15-years-old before it
will bear seed. The copious amount of seeds can
create a mess on hard surfaces for a period of time.
Trees have an extensive but shallow root system.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ulmus americana
Pronunciation: UL-mus uh-mair-ih-KAY-nuh
Common name(s): American Elm
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 2 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: reclamation plant; specimen; tree has been
successfully grown in urban areas where air pollution,
poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or drought are
common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 70 to 90 feet
Spread: 50 to 70 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-649, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ulmus americana -- American Elm Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: double serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch; < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; inconspicuous
and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage cause significant
litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Wood specific gravity: 0.50
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Ulmus americana -- American Elm Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: good
Figure 3. Foliage of American Elm.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Once a very popular and long-lived (300+ years)
shade and street tree, American Elm suffered a
dramatic decline with the introduction of Dutch elm
disease, a fungus spread by a bark beetle. The wood
of American Elm is very hard and was a valuable
timber tree used for lumber, furniture and veneer. The
Indians once made canoes out of American Elm
trunks, and early settlers would steam the wood so it
could be bent to make barrels and wheel hoops. It
was also used for the rockers on rocking chairs.
Today, the wood that can be found is used mainly for
making furniture.
American Elm should be grown in full sun on
well-drained, rich soil. If you plant American Elm,
plan on implementing a monitoring program to watch
for symptoms of Dutch elm disease. It is vital to the
health of existing trees that a program be in place to
administer special care to these disease-sensitive trees.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings. Young plants
transplant easily.
Pests
Many pests may infest American Elm, including
bark beetles, elm borer, gypsy moth, mites, and scales.
Leaf beetles often consume large quantities of foliage.
Diseases
Many diseases may infect American Elm,
including Dutch elm disease, phloem necrosis, leaf
spot diseases, and cankers. American Elm is a host
for Ganoderma butt rot.