Fact Sheet ST-651
October 1994
Ulmus crassifolia
Figure 1. Mature Cedar Elm.
Cedar Elm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Cedar Elm is a native North American deciduous
tree which reaches 50 to 90 feet in height with a
spread of 40 to 60 feet and forms a rounded silhouette
(Fig. 1). Trees 118 feet tall have been documented in
the wild. The stiff and rough-textured, dark green
leaves fade to bright yellow to red/brown before
dropping in fall. The inconspicuous, green,
summertime flowers are followed by the production of
winged seeds in late summer or early fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ulmus crassifolia
Pronunciation: UL-mus krass-ih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Cedar Elm
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: large parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in
size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
parking lot islands (100-200 square feet in size);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential
street tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban
areas where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted
soil, and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 70 feet
Spread: 40 to 60 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-651, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ulmus crassifolia -- Cedar Elm Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; double serrate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; inconspicuous
and not showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches; .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: green
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Ulmus crassifolia -- Cedar Elm Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Cedar Elm.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
It would be a low maintenance shade and street
tree except for its thin, somewhat drooping branches
which are somewhat susceptible to breakage at the
crotches of major limbs. Some of this could be
avoided by maintaining a regular pruning and training
program in the early years after transplanting. Strive
to keep branches no larger than about two-thirds the
diameter of the trunk. Cedar Elm has been used
extensively (almost exclusively in some local areas) in
Texas as a street tree for many years due to its
adaptability to wet, poor soil conditions. However, it
is always best to diversify the tree species in an area
so that if a major problem arises on one species, it will
only effect a portion of the tree population in the
community.
Cedar Elm should be grown in full sun on welldrained soil, acid or alkaline. It is very droughttolerant once established and tolerates wet soil well.
However, mistletoe can engulf the tree leading to its
demise.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Elm leaf beetles can feed on foliage. Aphids can
also drop copious amounts of honey dew beneath the
canopy.
Diseases
Dutch elm disease kills trees. Powdery mildew
can be a problem in some years.