Fact Sheet ST-652
October 1994
Ulmus parvifolia
Figure 1. Middle-aged Chinese Elm.
Chinese Elm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
An excellent tree that is surprisingly under-used,
Chinese Elm possesses many traits which make it ideal
for a multitude of landscape uses (Fig. 1). A fastgrowing, deciduous or evergreen tree, Chinese Elm
forms a graceful, upright, rounded canopy of long,
arching, and somewhat weeping branches which are
clothed with two to three-inch-long, shiny, dark green,
leathery leaves. Some specimens grow in the typical
vase-shaped elm form. In colder regions of the
country in fall, leaves are transformed into various
shades of red, purple, or yellow. The tree is evergreen
in the southern extent of its range. The showy,
exfoliating bark reveals random, mottled patterns of
grey, green, orange, and brown, adding great textural
and visual interest, especially to its winter silhouette.
Chinese Elm can reach 80 feet in height but is more
often seen at 40 to 50 feet, making it an ideal shade,
specimen, street or parking lot tree. They look very
nice planted in a grove or along a street.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ulmus parvifolia
Pronunciation: UL-mus par-vih-FOLE-ee-uh
Common name(s): Chinese Elm, Lacebark Elm
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; reclamation
plant; shade tree; small parking lot islands (< 100
square feet in size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide);
specimen; sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street
tree; tree has been successfully grown in urban areas
where air pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil,
and/or drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-652, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ulmus parvifolia -- Chinese Elm Page 2
DESCRIPTION
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Height: 40 to 50 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate; serrulate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: purple; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; inconspicuous
and not showy
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Ulmus parvifolia -- Chinese Elm Page 3
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
Figure 3. Foliage of Chinese Elm.
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Select trees with branches spaced along one trunk.
It is not essential that this trunk be straight. Buy from
nurseries who understand how to train and prune this
tree for street and parking lot use, otherwise you may
be trimming and pruning low drooping branches on a
regular basis.
Trees which have a trunk less than about two
inches in diameter often require staking and some
early pruning to prevent leaning and blowover due to a
heavy crown and unstable root system. Nursery
operators often train trees to a single, straight trunk by
staking at an early age. Leave branches on the lower
trunk during this training period to encourage caliper
development on the lower trunk. Older trees look nice
with an occasional light thinning to show off the
wonderful trunk and branch structure.
Please do not confuse it with Ulmus pumila, the
Siberian elm. Siberian Elm is far inferior to Chinese
Elm and should not be planted, except perhaps in
extreme climates such as the drier parts of the
Midwest where the limits of most other trees are
tested.
Chinese Elm is sometimes topped in the nursery to
create a full head of foliage, and branches originate
from one point on the trunk. There is not enough
room on the trunk to support this type of branch
structure, and some may split out from the tree as it
ages. This tree may take more effort to properly train
and prune when young than some other species but it
is well worth the effort. It will have a long service
life in urban areas with proper training early on.
The root system is comprised of several very
large-diameter roots which can grow to great distances
from the trunk. These are usually located fairly close
Ulmus parvifolia -- Chinese Elm Page 4
to the surface of the soil and can occasionally lift
sidewalks. They can get into sewer lines causing
damage. But they are usually not a problem and
should not be cause to eliminate this tree from your
urban tree planting program. This is among the top
urban trees on most recommended tree lists in the
South and mid-West. Occasionally, root suckers
emerge from beneath the canopy and will require
pruning.
Chinese Elm will grow in full sun on a wide range
of soils, adapting easily to extremes in pH (including
alkaline) or moisture, and tolerates urban heat, and
wind. Trees will look their best, though, when grown
in moist, well-drained, fertile soil but they adapt to
drought and the extremes of urban sites. Very suitable
for street tree pits, parking lot islands, and other
confined soil spaces.
Many cultivars are available for size and form:
‘Catlin’ is dwarf; ‘Drake’, USDA hardiness zones 7 to
9, has small, dark green leaves, sweeping, upright
branches forming a rounded crown, and greater leaf
retention being almost evergreen in California and
Florida; ‘Dynasty’ has smooth, dark grey bark, smaller
leaves and is vase-shaped, with red fall color in the
north; ‘Frosty’ has a small (0.75-inch-long), whitemargined leaf which may revert back to green; ‘Emer
I’ has a dark green, fine-textured uniform crown
comprised of ascending branches with bright orange,
grey and brown exfoliating bark. It is a brand new
introduction and the parent tree is reportedly 50 years,
32 feet tall and 54 feet wide; ‘Golden Rey’ is
reportedly hardy to USDA hardiness zone 6, is a
moderate grower and may be denser and more
compact than the species. This cultivar was selected
for its yellow new foliage color which deepens to
golden yellow in autumn; ‘Pathfinder’ has been
extensively tested in Ohio for 30 years (USDA
hardiness zone 5a). It has a single trunk with broad,
upright branches and grows at a moderate height.
Bark is nicely exfoliating, fall color is a rich red and
this National Arboretum/Ohio Research Site
introduction tolerates wet and dry soil. A good tree
for tough sites; ‘Sempervirens (Pendens)’ is more
round-headed, weeping and spreading with persistent
foliage, almost evergreen in USDA hardiness zones 8b
through 10; and ‘True Green’ has glossy, deep green
leaves, a graceful, round-headed outline, and tends to
be evergreen.
Propagation is by seed, summer cuttings, or grafts.
Pests
This elm’s pests are borers and chewing insects.
It shows considerable resistance to elm leaf beetle and
Japanese beetle.
Diseases
It is usually resistant to Dutch Elm Disease and
phloem necrosis. Cankers may develop on young
trunks where soil is excessively wet. These occur on
nursery and landscape trees. The causal agent has not
been identified but theories abound. Twig blight can
be an occasional problem.