Fact Sheet ST-656
October 1994
Ulmus pumila
Figure 1. Mature Siberian Elm.
Siberian Elm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This rapidly-growing deciduous tree has a rounded
canopy with somewhat drooping branches, and reaches
40 to 60 feet in height with a spread of 35 to 50 feet
(Fig. 1). The glossy green, two to three-inch-long by
0.5 to 1-inch-wide leaves turn pale yellow in fall
before dropping. The inconspicuous, green, springtime
flowers are produced in small clusters among the
leaves and are followed by half-inch-long, flat, winged
seedpods which mature during early summer. The
wood is fairly brittle and subject to damage during
storms, which creates a lot of twig litter on the lawn
afterward. Since major limbs split from the crotches
on older trees, this is considered a tree to avoid. Most
urban tree managers and horticulturists will not
recommend planting this tree. However, recent
observations showed that improper pruning, including
topping, may be partially responsible for the tree’s
weak-wooded reputation.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ulmus pumila
Pronunciation: UL-mus PEW-mih-luh
Common name(s): Siberian Elm
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: shade tree
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 50 to 70 feet
Spread: 35 to 50 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: medium
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-656, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ulmus pumila -- Siberian Elm Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); lanceolate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: green
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; fruit, twigs, or foliage
cause significant litter
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: droop as the tree grows, and
will require pruning for vehicular or pedestrian
clearance beneath the canopy; not particularly showy;
should be grown with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: green; gray
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
extended flooding; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: moderate
Ulmus pumila -- Siberian Elm Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Siberian Elm.
Other
Roots: surface roots can lift sidewalks or interfere
with mowing
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Siberian Elm grows well in full sun on welldrained soil. This tree is easily grown and will
tolerate a variety of adverse conditions, such as poor
soil, drought, and moderate salt. It is probably best
saved for the reclamation site or other out-of-the-way
location. It is also useful in climates where many
other trees grow poorly. This could include the drier
parts of the central United States.
Propagation is by seed or layering.
Pests
Mites and elm leaf beetles infest this Elm. The
tree is considered weak wooded.
Diseases
Wetwood disease can infect the trunk.