Fact Sheet ST-657
October 1994
Ungnadia speciosa
Figure 1. Young Mexican-Buckeye.
Mexican-Buckeye1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Mexican Buckeye is a native North American
deciduous tree or large shrub which reaches 20 to 30
feet in height with a spread of 20 feet (Fig. 1). The
spreading, irregular crown is composed of many small,
upright branches which along with the persistent
seedpods and smooth, mottled gray/brown bark helps
make Mexican Buckeye an attractive feature in the
winter landscape. The pinnately compound, dark
green leaves turn a beautiful bright yellow color in fall
before dropping. In spring the tree is also quite
colorful when the showy, fragrant, purple blooms
appear, either just before or with the new, fresh leaves.
The showy, three-pod seeds contain sweet seeds which
are poisonous. It is reported that children in west
Texas have used the round seeds as a substitute for
marbles. The seedpods persist on the bare branches
throughout the winter.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Ungnadia speciosa
Pronunciation: ung-NAW-dee-uh spee-see-OH-suh
Common name(s): Mexican-Buckeye
Family: Sapindaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7 through 9A (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: oval
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-657, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Ungnadia speciosa -- Mexican-Buckeye Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: crenate; serrulate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate; ovate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: pink
Flower characteristics: fall flowering; pleasant
fragrance; showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: 1 to 3 inches
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; no
significant litter problem; persistent on the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; not particularly
showy; tree wants to grow with several trunks but can
be trained to grow with a single trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Ungnadia speciosa -- Mexican-Buckeye Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Mexican-Buckeye.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
This small tree is probably best used as a
specimen planted for the coarse leaf texture and
striking fall color display. It would make a nice tall
component in a shrub border or other grouping of
shrubs. The corner of a large building could be
buffered or softened by this tall shrub or small tree.
Mexican Buckeye should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on well-drained soil and prefers moist,
alkaline soil. Established trees are quite droughttolerant.
Propagation is easily done by seed.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.