Fact Sheet ST-658
October 1994
Veitchia merrillii
Figure 1. Middle-aged Christmas Palm.
Christmas Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
This stocky, single-trunked palm with stiffly
arched, six-foot-long, bright green fronds is noted for
the fall and winter appearance of the very showy
clusters of glossy, bright red fruits which hang below
the leaves at the base of the crown shaft (Fig. 1).
Reaching 25 feet in height, though often much smaller,
Christmas Palm has a very neat appearance and is
well-suited to use as a patio, terrace, specimen, or
framing tree. Unfortunately, the palm is very
susceptible to lethal yellowing disease and probably
should not be planted. Fortunately, there are other
Veitchia resistant to the disease, including Veitchia
macdanialsi and Veitchia montgumeryana, but these
are much taller palms with thicker trunks.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Veitchia merrillii
Pronunciation: VEE-chee-uh mer-RILL-ee-eye
Common name(s): Christmas Palm, Manila Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 10B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; suitable for
growing indoors; near a deck or patio; specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-658, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Veitchia merrillii -- Christmas Palm Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: odd pinnately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate
Leaflet venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaflet blade length: 12 to 18 inches; 8 to 12 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife; fruit,
twigs, or foliage cause significant litter; persistent on
the tree; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: yes
Veitchia merrillii -- Christmas Palm Page 3
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: tree has winter interest due to
unusual form, nice persistent fruits, showy winter
trunk, or winter flowers
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: very sensitive to one or more pests
or diseases which can affect tree health or aesthetics
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Christmas Palm should receive some shade while
young but will grow in full sun when older on a wide
variety of well-drained soils, including limestone soils.
Trees should only be used in frost-free areas.
Consider substituting one of the Veitchia mentioned
above, the Carpentaria Palm, Ptychosperma
macarthurii, or a variety of other palms resistant to
lethal yellowing disease.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Scales can infest and spoil young palms.
Diseases
It is very susceptible to lethal yellowing disease.