Fact Sheet ST-661
October 1994
Viburnum rufidulum
Figure 1. Mature Rusty Blackhaw.
Rusty Blackhaw1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A native of the well-drained, upland woods of
southeastern North America, Rusty Blackhaw forms a
multiple or (occasionally) single-trunked small tree or
large shrub, reaching 25 feet in height with an equal
spread (Fig. 1). The dark bark is blocky, resembling
older Flowering Dogwood bark. Trunks usually grow
no thicker than six inches and arch away from the tree,
forming a pleasing, vase-shaped crown. Leaves are
dark green, three inches long, leathery, and extremely
glossy. The tree is covered in springtime with striking
five-inch-wide clusters of small, white blooms. These
flowers are followed by clusters of dark blue, waxy,
one-half-inch-long fruits that are extremely popular
with wildlife and will occasionally persist on the plant
from September throughout the autumn, if not eaten by
wildlife. In fall, Rusty Blackhaw puts on a brilliant
display of scarlet red to purple foliage.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Viburnum rufidulum
Pronunciation: vye-BER-num roo-FID-yoo-lum
Common name(s): Rusty Blackhaw, Southern
Blackhaw
Family: Caprifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5B through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; reclamation
plant; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in
size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 25 feet
Spread: 20 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: slow
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-661, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Viburnum rufidulum -- Rusty Blackhaw Page 2
Texture: medium
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrulate
Leaf shape: obovate; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: purple; red
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: blue
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic;
occasionally wet; alkaline; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: none
Viburnum rufidulum -- Rusty Blackhaw Page 3
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Figure 3. Foliage of Rusty Blackhaw.
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Rusty Blackhaw will grow and look nice in full
sun or partial shade on any reasonably fertile, welldrained soil. The tree grows in a shady spot but forms
a more open habit. Flowering is significantly reduced
in the shade. Although tolerant of drought, it will not
tolerate compacted soil. This would be a good tree for
planting beneath power lines and in other limited
space areas. Useful as a hedge, specimen, or border
tree, this deciduous tree adapts well to urban areas.
Shoots arise from the root system, sometimes as far
out as the dripline. This could be a maintenance
problem when planted in a bed of mulch. But sprouts
would be routinely cut with regular mowing when
planted as a street tree in a lawn. Pests are usually not
a major problem.
Propagation is by seed or cuttings.
Pests
This tree is usually pest-free. Viburnum aphid is
gray to dark green and feeds in clusters at the tips of
the branches, causing leaf curl. Viburnum opulus is
especially susceptible. The insects can be dislodged
with high pressure water spray from the garden hose.
Inspect the stems of unhealthy-looking plants for
possible scale infestations. If found, spray with
horticultural oil for some control.
Diseases
Bacterial leafspot causes round, water-soaked spots
on leaves and young stems. These develop into
shrunken, brown areas about 1/8-inch in diameter.
Destroy infected leaves, if you wish. This is not a
problem to be concerned about.
Bacterial crown gall forms galls on the lower
stems. Do not replant in the same spot.
Shoot blight causes grayish to brown decayed
spots on the leaves. The spots first appear at the leaf
margins, then spread to the rest of the leaf. Infected
flower clusters or twigs are killed.
A number of fungi cause leaf spots. Rake up and
destroy infected leaves. These are usually not a
serious problem.
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery growth
on the leaves, but this Viburnum is usually not
affected.