Fact Sheet ST-662
October 1994
Viburnum sieboldii
Figure 1. Mature Siebold Viburnum.
Siebold Viburnum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Most often grown as a large multi-trunked shrub
or small tree, Siebold Viburnum only reaches about 20
feet high (occasionally to 30 feet) and 10 to 12 feet
wide, creating an upright silhouette with short, firm
branches (Fig. 1). The two to six-inch-long by 1.5 to
3-inch-wide, dark green leaves give off a pungent odor
when crushed, and have been known to give an
occasional autumn display of red or purple color
although typically there is no fall color. In late May,
the plant is covered with three to six-inch-diameter
clusters of off-white, tiny blossoms. These blooms are
followed by small, half-inch, pinkish-red fruits which
ripen to dark blue or black from August to October,
and are held above the foliage, making them any easy
target for the birds who find them a delectable treat.
There are extremely showy for a period of about two
weeks.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Viburnum sieboldii
Pronunciation: vye-BER-num see-BOLE-dee-eye
Common name(s): Siebold Viburnum
Family: Caprifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 4 through 7 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: hedge; wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; no
proven urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 10 to 12 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: upright
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-662, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Viburnum sieboldii -- Siebold Viburnum Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: crenate; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval); obovate
Leaf venation: bowed; banchidodrome; pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen; fragrant
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; red
Fruit characteristics: attracts birds; no significant
litter problem; showy
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: gray
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Viburnum sieboldii -- Siebold Viburnum Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Siebold Viburnum.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Best used as a specimen or patio tree where there
is plenty of soil space for root expansion. Provides
nice scale to a small landscape but is also suited for
planting in mass or on 15 to 25-foot centers along a
boulevard or entrance road to a commercial landscape.
The multi-trunks twist as they grow providing a nice
formal Oriental effect.
Siebold Viburnum should be grown in full sun or
partial shade on moist, well-drained soils, acid or
alkaline. Leaves will show evidence of scorch if soil
dries out, but this appears to be a drought avoidance
mechanism causing little permanent damage.
The cultivar ‘Seneca’ has very firm fruits which
are not eaten by birds and provide for a much longer
fruit effect than the species. It is preferred over the
species because of the extended fruiting effect.
Propagation is by cuttings which root easily.
Pests and Diseases
No pests or diseases are of major concern.