Fact Sheet ST-659
October 1994
Viburnum odoratissimum
Figure 1. Mature Sweet Viburnum.
Sweet Viburnum1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Large, leathery, dark green, glossy leaves and
clusters of extremely fragrant, small, white flowers,
completely covering the plant in springtime, make
Sweet Viburnum a longtime landscape favorite (Fig.
1). The large, dull green leaves form a moderately
coarse texture. For some reason, it has fallen out of
favor as a small tree in recent years. This adaptable
tree should be ‘rediscovered’ by landscape architects
and others specifying small trees for urban and
suburban landscapes. Often used as a screen or
clipped hedge, its dense, spreading, evergreen habit
makes Sweet Viburnum suitable for use as a small
tree, reaching 25 to 30 feet tall and wide at maturity,
with a dense, multibranched, rounded canopy. The
flowers are often followed by small, red berries which
turn black when ripe and are moderately showy.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Viburnum odoratissimum
Pronunciation: vye-BER-num
oh-duh-ruh-TISS-ih-mum
Common name(s): Sweet Viburnum
Family: Caprifoliaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 8B through 10A (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; hedge; large
parking lot islands (> 200 square feet in size); wide
tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized parking lot
islands (100-200 square feet in size); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); recommended for buffer
strips around parking lots or for median strip plantings
in the highway; near a deck or patio; screen; shade
tree; small parking lot islands (< 100 square feet in
size); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet wide); specimen;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 25 to 30 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-659, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Viburnum odoratissimum -- Sweet Viburnum Page 2
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: round
Crown density: dense
Growth rate: slow
Texture: medium
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire; serrate
Leaf shape: elliptic (oval)
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
spring flowering (Fig. 3)
Fruit
Fruit shape: round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black; red
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; routinely grown
with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks;
grow mostly upright and will not droop; not
particularly showy; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Viburnum odoratissimum -- Sweet Viburnum Page 3
Current year twig color: green
Figure 3. Flower of Sweet Viburnum.
Current year twig thickness: thick
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in the shade; tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: low
Soil salt tolerance: poor
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Sweet Viburnum grows quickly in full sun or
partial shade on a wide variety of soils. It is tolerant
to drought, holding up very well in unirrigated
landscapes once established. Relatively maintenancefree, Sweet Viburnum grown as a tree will require
pruning to control size and shape. A nice, neat,
compact canopy develops without any training.
Interior sprouts and branches need to be removed to
make the trunk show. Only lower branches need
removal to allow for pedestrian and vehicle clearance
beneath the crown. This would be a good tree for
planting along a street where power lines or other
obstructions limit overhead space. Nurseries should be
encouraged to grow this adaptable plant as a tree form
in addition to the shrub form commonly available. It
can be trained to one trunk or grown as a multistemmed specimen.
The cultivar ‘Emerald Lustre’ has larger leaves
and ‘Nanum’ is a dwarf form. Viburnum
odoratissimum var. awabuki has large glossy leaves
and flower panicles, and beautiful red berries.
Propagation is by cuttings or layerings.
Pests
This tree is usually fairly pest-free.
Viburnum aphid is gray to dark green and feeds in
clusters at the tips of the branches, causing leaf curl.
The insects can be dislodged with high pressure water
spray from the garden hose. They usually cause little
or no appreciable damage.
Inspect the stems of unhealthy-looking plants for
possible scale infestations. If found, spray with
horticultural oil for some control.
Sweet Viburnum is also infested by thrips, mites,
white-fly, bagworms, and sooty mold, but none are
normally serious.
Diseases
Bacterial leafspot causes round, water-soaked spots
on leaves and young stems. These develop into
shrunken, brown areas about 1/8-inch in diameter.
Destroy infected leaves.
Bacterial crown gall forms galls on the lower
stems. Do not replant in the same spot.
Shoot blight causes grayish to brown decayed
spots on the leaves. The spots first appear at the leaf
margins, then spread to the rest of the leaf. Infected
flower clusters or twigs are killed.
Viburnum odoratissimum -- Sweet Viburnum Page 4
A number of fungi cause leaf spots. Leaf spots
are not usually serious diseases. Rake up and destroy
infected leaves, if you wish.
Downy mildew and powdery mildew cause a
white powdery growth on the leaves but usually cause
only cosmetic damage of little consequence.