Fact Sheet ST-664
October 1994
Vitex agnus-castus
Figure 1. Mature Chastetree.
Chastetree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Chastetree can be grown as a large, deciduous,
multistemmed shrub or small, 10 to 15 feet tall tree,
and is noteworthy for its showy, summer display (late
springtime in the deep South) of fragrant, upwardlypointing, terminal panicles of lavender blooms which
are quite attractive to butterflies and bees (Fig. 1).
The tree is often planted where honey is marketed to
promote excellent honey production. The trunk is gray
and blocky and somewhat ornamental. The sagescented leaves of Chastetree are shaped liked a hand,
or palmate, and were once believed to have sedative
effects. Vitex has the common name "Chastetree"
since Athenian women used the leaves in their beds to
keep themselves chaste during the feasts of Ceres.
Vitex seeds itself into landscaped beds and can
become somewhat weedy.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Vitex agnus-castus
Pronunciation: VYE-tecks AG-nus-KASE-tus
Common name(s): Chastetree, Vitex
Family: Verbenaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 7B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter;
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; near a deck
or patio; trainable as a standard; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 15 feet
Spread: 15 to 20 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: entire
Leaflet shape: lanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous; fragrant
Leaflet blade length: 4 to 8 inches; 2 to 4 inches
Leaf color: blue or blue-green; green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-664, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Vitex agnus-castus -- Chastetree Page 2
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Flower
Flower color: lavender
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; spring
flowering; summer flowering; very showy
Fruit
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; showy trunk; tree wants to grow with several
trunks but can be trained to grow with a single trunk;
no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: medium; thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
Vitex agnus-castus -- Chastetree Page 3
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 3. Foliage of Chastetree.
Chastetree is used effectively in the mixed
shrubbery border or as a specimen. It is usually seen
with a multiple trunk but can be trained in the nursery
into a tree with one or several trunks, if so desired.
Occasionally used as a street or median tree since it
will not grow up and into powerlines, but branches
tend to droop toward the ground and would hinder
traffic visibility if planted too close to the street.
Median planting would be fine if there is adequate
horizontal space for the crown to develop and spread.
Since the flowers attract bees, locate it accordingly.
Chastetree prefers a loose, well-drained soil that is
moist or on the dry side, not wet, but will tolerate
drained clay or sandy soils. The tree often suffers
from dieback in organic, mucky, or other soil which is
kept too moist, such as in the New Orleans or Dallas
areas. Chastetree should be planted in full sun or light
shade, and will tolerate hot weather extremely well,
moderate salt air exposure and alkaline soil.
In the colder regions (USDA hardiness zones 6b
and 7), Chastetree can be killed to the ground by
severe winters and is more often seen as a
multistemmed shrub. Chastetree is a fast-grower and
can easily recover its size when cold weather prunes it.
Very similar to Vitex negundo, which also is called
Chastetree, Vitex agnus-castus is not as cold hardy as
Vitex negundo (grows in USDA hardiness zone 6a).
Vitex agnus-castus may survive in USDA hardiness
zone 6a if protected from winter winds.
Several cultivars are available which offer flower
color variety. ‘Silver Spire’ and ‘Alba’ have white
flowers, and ‘Rosea’ has pink flowers.
Propagate by softwood cuttings in early summer or
by seeds.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Leaf spot can almost defoliate the tree. Root rot
can cause decline in soils which are kept too moist.