Fact Sheet ST-668
October 1994
Vitex negundo ‘Heterophylla’
Figure 1. Middle-aged Cut-Leaf Chastetree.
Cut-Leaf Chastetree1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Cut-Leaf Chastetree can be grown as a large,
deciduous, multistemmed shrub or small, 10 to 15 feet
tall tree, and is noteworthy for its showy, summer
display (late springtime in the deep South) of fragrant,
upwardly-pointing, terminal panicles of lavender
blooms which are quite attractive to butterflies and
bees (Fig. 1). The tree is often planted where honey is
marketed to promote excellent honey production. The
trunk is gray and blocky and somewhat ornamental.
The highly dissected leaves of Cut-leaf Chastetree are
shaped like Cut-leaf Japanese Maple and were once
believed to have sedative effects. Vitex has the
common name "Chastetree" since Athenian women
used the leaves in their beds to keep themselves chaste
during the feasts of Ceres. Vitex seeds itself into
landscaped beds and can become somewhat weedy.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Vitex negundo ‘Heterophylla’
Pronunciation: VYE-tecks nee-GUHN-doe
Common name(s): Cut-Leaf Chastetree, Cut-Leaf
Vitex
Family: Verbenaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 6 through 9 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: recommended for buffer strips around parking
lots or for median strip plantings in the highway;
specimen; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: somewhat available, may have to go out
of the region to find the tree
DESCRIPTION
Height: 10 to 18 feet
Spread: 15 to 25 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
Crown shape: round; spreading
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: fine
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: opposite/subopposite; whorled
(Fig. 3)
Leaf type: palmately compound
Leaflet margin: incised; parted; serrate
Leaflet shape: lanceolate
Leaflet venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous; fragrant
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-668, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Vitex negundo ‘Heterophylla’ -- Cut-Leaf Chastetree Page 2
Leaflet blade length: 2 to 4 inches
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: lavender
Flower characteristics: pleasant fragrance; showy;
summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: bark is thin and easily
damaged from mechanical impact; droop as the tree
grows, and will require pruning for vehicular or
pedestrian clearance beneath the canopy; routinely
grown with, or trainable to be grown with, multiple
trunks; not particularly showy; tree wants to grow with
several trunks but can be trained to grow with a single
trunk; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; well-drained
Drought tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: tree has outstanding ornamental
features and could be planted more
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Pest resistance: no pests are normally seen on the
tree
Vitex negundo ‘Heterophylla’ -- Cut-Leaf Chastetree Page 3
Figure 3. Foliage of Cut-Leaf Chastetree.
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Chastetree is used effectively in the mixed
shrubbery border or as a specimen. It is usually seen
as a shrub with a multiple trunk but can be trained in
the nursery into a tree with one or several trunks if so
desired. Occasionally used as a street or median tree
since it will not grow up and into powerlines, but
branches tend to droop toward the ground and would
hinder traffic visibility if planted too close to the
street. Median planting would be fine if there is
adequate horizontal space for the crown to develop
and spread. Since the flowers attract bees, locate it
accordingly.
Chastetree prefers a loose, well-drained soil that is
moist or on the dry side, not wet, but will tolerate
drained clay or sandy soils. The tree often suffers
from dieback in organic, mucky, or other soil which is
kept too moist, such as in the New Orleans or Dallas
areas. Chastetree should be planted in full sun or light
shade, and will tolerate hot weather extremely well,
moderate salt air exposure and alkaline soil.
In the colder regions (USDA hardiness zones 6b
and 7), Chastetree can be killed to the ground by
severe winters and is more often seen as a
multistemmed shrub. Chastetree is a fast-grower and
can easily recover its size when cold weather prunes it.
Very similar to Vitex agnus-castus, which also is
called Chastetree, Vitex negundo is more cold hardy
(grows in USDA hardiness zone 6a). Vitex
agnus-castus may survive in USDA hardiness zone 6a
if protected from winter winds.
Propagate by softwood cuttings in early summer or
by seeds.
Pests
No pests are of major concern.
Diseases
Leaf spot can almost defoliate the tree. Root rot
can cause decline in soils which are kept too moist.