Fact Sheet ST-669
October 1994
Washingtonia filifera
Figure 1. Middle-aged Desert Palm.
Desert Palm1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Commonly seen at 40 to 50 feet but capable of
soaring to 80 feet in height, Desert Fan Palm is
quickly recognized as related to the much-overused,
straight, single-trunked street palm of years past,
Washingtonia robusta (Fig. 1). However, Desert Fan
Palm is better suited to the home landscape since it
grows more slowly and is shorter. This also allows it
to be used in more garden applications, such as
containers or grouped together as a mass planting. It
does not grow well when it is over-irrigated in Florida
because it frequently develops trunk or root rot.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Washingtonia filifera
Pronunciation: wosh-ing-TOE-nee-uh fill-LIFF-er-uh
Common name(s): Desert Palm, California
Washingtonia Palm
Family: Arecaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9 through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide); medium-sized
tree lawns (4-6 feet wide); narrow tree lawns (3-4 feet
wide); residential street tree; no proven urban tolerance
Availability: grown in small quantities by a small
number of nurseries
DESCRIPTION
Height: 40 to 60 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: palm; upright
Crown density: open
Growth rate: medium
Texture: coarse
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-669, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Washingtonia filifera -- Desert Palm Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral
Leaf type: costapalmate
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: star-shaped
Leaf venation: palmate
Leaf type and persistence: broadleaf evergreen;
evergreen
Leaf blade length: >36 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white; yellow
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval; round
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: black
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; not particularly showy; should be grown
with a single leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Crown shaft: no
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Washingtonia filifera -- Desert Palm Page 3
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: No entries found.
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The lower leaves persist on the tree after they die,
forming a dense, brown, shaggy covering below the
living, grey/green, broad, fan-shaped leaves, giving it
the common name of Petticoat Palm. These dead
fronds are known to be a fire hazard and a popular
bedding roost for rodents and, because of this, must be
removed by law in some areas.
Plant this palm only on soil which is extremely
well-drained to prevent trunk or root rot. Moderate
salt tolerance allows it to be used close to the coast in
several of the southern states. This palm could be
tried more in well-drained sites as a replacement for
Washingtonia robusta which grows very tall with a
skinny trunk. But over-irrigation and rainy weather
could initiate root rot. Washingtonia filifera is shorter,
has a thicker trunk, and is better suited for planting in
dry urban landscapes, such as in Texas, Arizona and
California. They reportedly suffer and often die from
root rot when irrigated. Select Washingtonia robusta
in an irrigated landscape and for the eastern U.S.
Propagation is by seed.
Pests
Scales while young, palm weevil in old age, palm
leaf skeletonizer and a variety of scales at any time
can infest this palm.
Diseases
Trunk or root rot in wet soils may infect this tree.