Fact Sheet ST-675
October 1994
Yucca elephantipes
Figure 1. Middle-aged Spineless Yucca.
Spineless Yucca1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
A dramatic landscape element, Spineless Yucca is
the tallest of the Yuccas, reaching 30 feet in height
with a 15-foot spread, its single, thick, rough trunk
topped with straplike, four-foot-long leaves (Fig. 1).
The trunk can grow to four-foot-thick. Sprouts often
grow from the base of the trunk forming a multitrunked tree. Spineless Yucca grows fairly rapidly but
usually stays under 20 feet in height, and is ideal for
use in succulent gardens or large planters. Unlike its
close relative, Spanish Bayonet, Spineless Yucca can
be used in close range of people since it lacks the
formidable, terminal spine and has harmless leaves. It
was introduced into Florida in 1956 as a substitute for
the spiny Spanish Bayonet.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Yucca elephantipes
Pronunciation: YUCK-uh ell-uh-fan-TYE-peez
Common name(s): Spineless Yucca, Soft-Tip Yucca
Family: Agavaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 9B through 11 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: container or above-ground planter; suitable for
growing indoors; recommended for buffer strips
around parking lots or for median strip plantings in the
highway; near a deck or patio; specimen; no proven
urban tolerance
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 20 to 30 feet
Spread: 10 to 15 feet
Crown uniformity: irregular outline or silhouette
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-675, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Yucca elephantipes -- Spineless Yucca Page 2
Crown shape: upright
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Crown density: open
Growth rate: fast
Texture: coarse
Foliage
Leaf arrangement: alternate; spiral (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: entire
Leaf shape: lanceolate; linear
Leaf venation: parallel
Leaf type and persistence: evergreen
Leaf blade length: >36 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: no fall color change
Fall characteristic: not showy
Flower
Flower color: white
Flower characteristics: showy; summer flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: .5 to 1 inch
Fruit covering: fleshy
Fruit color: brown
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: routinely grown with, or
trainable to be grown with, multiple trunks; grow
mostly upright and will not droop; showy trunk; no
thorns
Pruning requirement: needs little pruning to develop
a strong structure
Breakage: resistant
Current year twig color: green
Current year twig thickness: stout
Yucca elephantipes -- Spineless Yucca Page 3
Culture
Figure 3. Foliage of Spineless Yucca.
Light requirement: tree grows in part shade/part sun;
tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; acidic; alkaline;
well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Other
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
The two to three-foot-tall bloom is produced on
top of the stalks once the plant is 8 to 10 feet tall.
Blooms are edible and high in calcium and potassium
and can be used in salads. Leaves contain large
amounts of ascorbic acid.
Spineless Yucca grows easily in full sun or partial
shade on any well-drained soil. Do not plant Yucca
unless drainage is superior. Yucca grows well as a
houseplant in a well-lighted area.
A Spineless Yucca cultivar with striped foliage,
‘Variegata’, may be found in some nurseries, and may
be gaining in popularity.
Propagation is by seed or by cuttings of any size.
Suckers at the base of the plant root quite easily.
Pests
Pests include Yucca moth borers, scale, and black
weevil which bore into roots and stems.
Diseases
No diseases are of major concern, except root rot
in soils kept too moist. Do not irrigate Yucca. Leaf
spots sometimes infect Yucca but do no real harm to
the plant.