Fact Sheet ST-677
October 1994
Zelkova serrata
Figure 1. Mature Japanese Zelkova.
Japanese Zelkova1
Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson2
INTRODUCTION
Zelkova is often listed as a replacement for
American Elm since it has roughly the same vase
shape and grows 90 to 100 feet tall with a 60 to 80-
foot spread (Fig. 1). But no tree will truly match the
grace and elegance of the American Elm. Zelkova is
massive, with the trunk capable of growing to four feet
or more in diameter. It has a moderate growth rate
and likes a sunny exposure. Branches are more
numerous and smaller in diameter than American Elm.
Leaves are 1.5 to 4 inches long, turning a brilliant
yellow, orange, or burnt umber in the fall.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Scientific name: Zelkova serrata
Pronunciation: zell-KOE-vuh sair-AY-tuh
Common name(s): Japanese Zelkova, Saw-Leaf
Zelkova
Family: Ulmaceae
USDA hardiness zones: 5 through 8 (Fig. 2)
Origin: not native to North America
Uses: Bonsai; large parking lot islands (> 200 square
feet in size); wide tree lawns (>6 feet wide);
medium-sized parking lot islands (100-200 square feet
in size); medium-sized tree lawns (4-6 feet wide);
recommended for buffer strips around parking lots or
for median strip plantings in the highway; shade tree;
sidewalk cutout (tree pit); residential street tree; tree
has been successfully grown in urban areas where air
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or
drought are common
Availability: generally available in many areas within
its hardiness range
DESCRIPTION
Height: 55 to 80 feet
Spread: 50 to 75 feet
Crown uniformity: symmetrical canopy with a
regular (or smooth) outline, and individuals have more
or less identical crown forms
Crown shape: vase shape
Crown density: moderate
Growth rate: medium
Texture: fine
1. This document is adapted from Fact Sheet ST-677, a series of the Environmental Horticulture Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. Publication date: October 1994.
2. Edward F. Gilman, associate professor, Environmental Horticulture Department; Dennis G. Watson, associate professor, Agricultural Engineering
Department, Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville FL 32611.
Zelkova serrata -- Japanese Zelkova Page 2
Foliage
Figure 2. Shaded area represents potential planting range.
Leaf arrangement: alternate (Fig. 3)
Leaf type: simple
Leaf margin: serrate
Leaf shape: oblong; ovate
Leaf venation: pinnate
Leaf type and persistence: deciduous
Leaf blade length: less than 2 inches
Leaf color: green
Fall color: copper; orange; red; yellow
Fall characteristic: showy
Flower
Flower characteristics: inconspicuous and not
showy; spring flowering
Fruit
Fruit shape: oval
Fruit length: < .5 inch
Fruit covering: dry or hard
Fruit characteristics: does not attract wildlife;
inconspicuous and not showy; no significant litter
problem
Trunk and Branches
Trunk/bark/branches: grow mostly upright and will
not droop; showy trunk; should be grown with a single
leader; no thorns
Pruning requirement: requires pruning to develop
strong structure
Breakage: susceptible to breakage either at the crotch
due to poor collar formation, or the wood itself is
weak and tends to break
Current year twig color: brown
Current year twig thickness: thin
Culture
Light requirement: tree grows in full sun
Soil tolerances: clay; loam; sand; slightly alkaline;
acidic; occasionally wet; well-drained
Drought tolerance: high
Aerosol salt tolerance: moderate
Zelkova serrata -- Japanese Zelkova Page 3
Other
Figure 3. Foliage of Japanese Zelkova.
Roots: surface roots are usually not a problem
Winter interest: no special winter interest
Outstanding tree: not particularly outstanding
Invasive potential: little, if any, potential at this time
Ozone sensitivity: sensitive or moderately tolerant
Verticillium wilt susceptibility: not known to be
susceptible
Pest resistance: long-term health usually not
affected by pests
USE AND MANAGEMENT
Unfortunately, the branches on Zelkova are often
clumped together on the trunk at one point. Double
and multiple trunks or leaders with embedded bark are
also common. This is not a desirable form for
planting in urban areas and needs to be prevented, or
corrected, on existing trees. Purchase trees with
branches spaced along the trunk so they can develop a
secure hold onto the trunk. These will be hard to find
but insist on it! Be sure that branches remain less than
about half the diameter of the trunk to maintain a
strong, durable form. Encourage nurserymen to grow
trees with good trunk and branch structure.
The tree will tolerate most soil types, including
those with a pH to about 7.5, but prefers a moist deep
loam. It is reportedly risky to transplant in the fall.
Established trees are fairly drought-tolerant, requiring
little irrigation unless located in sandy soil. It makes a
wonderful street tree even in restricted-soil tree pits,
and is almost pest free. The crowns will eventually
grow together if trees are planted on 30-foot-centers,
forming a wonderful shaded street. This is a tough,
urban tree which is often planted along streets in
downtown and residential areas.
Cultivars include: ‘Green Vase’ somewhat
resembles the vase shape of American Elms, is more
upright in habit and tolerant of pollution, makes a
great city street tree and produces a taller and narrower
tree than ‘Village Green;’ ‘Village Green’ also
resembles the shape of the American Elm and is more
winter hardy than ‘Green Vase’, and may have a
straighter trunk.
Diseases
Normally disease-free as it resists Dutch Elm
disease and Elm leaf beetle.
Zelkova is subject to canker diseases particularly if
the trunk is repeatedly wounded. Avoid wounding and
maintain tree health.